--- Page 3 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
oe
Disclaimer: The guidelines in this document have been developed based on Artificial
intelligence (AI) cybersecurity best practices, and it is for awareness purposes, in order to reduce
and mitigate cybersecurity risks related to AI systems. NCA assumes no responsibility or
liability for direct or indirect results of any actions taken based on the information contained
in this document. In addition, any contradictions found between this document and the laws
and regulation, the entity shall be subjected to the related laws and regulation, NCA strongly
recommends each entity to regularly conduct their own assessments to those risks.
Document Classification: Public 3 TLP:
--- Page 4 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
a
Traffic Light Protocol (TLP):
This protocol is widely used around the world and comprises four colors (light signals):
Red (Personal and Confidential- for the Intended Recipient Only)
The recipient is not authorized to share the red-classified material with any
individual, whether inside or outside the entity sharing is strictly prohibited beyond
the defined scope of receipt.
Amber Strict (Internal Sharing within the Same Entity)
The recipient may share the information only with the intended recipients inside
the entity.
Amber (Restricted Sharing)
The recipient may share the information only with the intended recipients inside
the entity or with recipients who are required to take action related to the shared
information.
Green (Sharing within the Same Community)
The recipient may share the information with others within the same entity or with
entities that have a relevant relationship or operate within the same sector however,
it is not permitted to disseminate or publish the information via public channels.
Clear (No Restrictions)
TLP:
Document Classification: Public
--- Page 5 ---
TLP:
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Table of Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
Objectives
Scope of Work and Applicability
Overview of Al and Al cybersecurity Risks
Al Cybersecurity Gudeilines Domains and Structure
AICG Documentation Structure
Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Annexes
Annex No. (A): Terminologies and Definitions
Annex No. (B): List of the Abbreviations
List of the Figures and Illustrations
Figure 1: the Main Objectives of AICG
Figure 2: Sample of the components of Generative and Agentic Al systems
Figure 3: Al Attack techniques
Figure 4: AICG Coding Scheme
Figure 5: AICG Structure
List of Tables
Table 1. Main Domains and Subdomains of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Table 2. AICG Structure
Table 3. Terms and Definitions
Table 4. List of Abbreviations
Document Classification: Public 5
--- Page 6 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
rr
Executive Summary
Pursuant to its statute issued by Royal Order No. (6801), dated 11021439H (31102017), the
National Cybersecurity Authority (NCA) is the competent authority nationally in charge of
cybersecurity in the Kingdom, And the national reference in its affairs. The NCA powers and
duties include, but not limited to, the development of cybersecurity policies, governance
mechanisms, frameworks, standards, controls, and guidelines to support the important role of
cybersecurity which has increased with the rise of cybersecurity risks in cyberspace more than
any time before.
Artificial intelligence (AI) technologies are evolving at a rapid pace, giving rise to cybersecurity
vulnerabilities and risks that may differ in nature from traditional cybersecurity risks. With the
continued advancement of AI, such as generative AI and agentic AI cybersecurity
considerations can sometimes lag behind innovation. This evolving landscape gives rise to new
and complex cybersecurity risks, necessitating dedicated guidelines tailored specifically to AI
systems, integrated not only during the design and development phases, but sustained
throughout the entire lifecycle, including deployment, ongoing use and retirement.
In this context, the AI Cybersecurity Guidelines (AICG-1: 2026) have been developed after
conducting a comprehensive study of multiple international related cybersecurity guidelines,
standards, frameworks, and controls, analyzing current status of national initiatives, statistics,
and regulatory requirements to address the unique cybersecurity risk profile of AI technologies
faced by entities.
Document Classification: Public TLP:
--- Page 7 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Introduction
The National Cybersecurity Authority (referred to in this document as The Authority or
NCA) developed the AI Cybersecurity Guidelines (AICG - 1: 2026) after conducting a
comprehensive study of multiple national and international cybersecurity frameworks,
standards and controls, and reviewing common industry practices and experiences in the field
of AI and AI cybersecurity.
The AI Cybersecurity Guidelines consist of the following:
4 Main Domains.
15 Subdomains.
42 Guidelines.
Objectives
The AI Cybersecurity Guidelines (AICG - 1: 2026) has been developed to support the national
cybersecurity objectives by addressing common cybersecurity risks that are unique to AI
systems.
The guidelines are defined to address AI cybersecurity risks across the AI system lifecycle,
including design and development, deployment, productionoperation, and retirement, and to
ensure that AI cybersecurity requirements are implemented.
The scope of AICG includes emerging AI technologies such as generative AI and agentic AI,
recognizing their distinctive threat vectors and the need for tailored guidelines. Overall this
document is designed to set the cybersecurity requirements (that has been previously defined
in NCA other published documents), in the context of AI systems specifically, thereby
supporting their effective implementation and enhancing cybersecurity across entities.
Document Classification: Public 7 TLP:
--- Page 8 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
ee
Figure (1) illustrates the main objectives that AICG aims to achieve, which is to emphasize the
importance of protecting the different components of AI Systems as well as protecting against
threats arising from the use of AI Systems.
Application  Evasion attack
Memory and interaction Training data done
Components layer leak ١ 9
inference
Components
Protection of the technical AICG targets Mainly ك1 0 م
components of Al systems
cybersecurity threats that
arise from using Al systems
Planning Al Model Prompt Model input
Components Components injection leak
Figure 1: The Main Objectives of AICG
Scope of Work and Applicability
NCA advices every entity in the Kingdom that adopts or plans to adopt to use AI systems to
follow these recommended guidelines and implement the minimum cybersecurity best practices
in order to minimize cybersecurity risk resulting from the use of AI technology.
These guidelines are not mandatory. However, they are intended to help maintain and enhance
the cybersecurity status of the entity while using and adopting AI systems, with the aim of
ensuring the application of best practices to reduce cybersecurity risks and to increase resilience
from cybersecurity attack.
Due to the dynamic nature of cybersecurity threats the NCA encourages entities to periodically
review and assess cybersecurity risks to determine the need to take additional measures
regarding AI systems.
Document Classification: Public TLP: Clear
--- Page 9 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Overview of Al and Al Cybersecurity Threats
Definition of Al Systems
According to The Saudi Data  AI Authority (SDAIA), AI Systems are Software systems that
rely on advanced technologies to predict, generate content, provide recommendations, or make
decisions, with varying levels of autonomy, depending on the data and the context in which
they operate.
Definition of Generative Al
According to The Saudi Data  AI Authority (SDAIA), Generative AI is A branch of artificial
intelligence that relies on machine learning techniques and deep neural networks to simulate
the human ability to produce original data and content.
Definition of Agentic Al
According to The Saudi Data  AI Authority (SDAIA), Agentic AI is a software system based
on AI algorithms, characterized by key features such as perceiving the surrounding
environment, interpreting information, setting goals, and making decisions autonomously
without constant human supervision.
Components of Al Systems
AI systems consist of a set of distinct interconnected components that ingest data, process
inputs, learn patterns, and generate outputs. Generative AI systems are built upon a set of core
components that support content generation and reasoning. In some cases, these systems may
incorporate additional agentic capabilities that enable planning, tool usage and multi-step task
1 SDAIA, AI Adoption Framework, Available at:
2 SDAIA, Artificial Intelligence, Available at:
3 SDAIA, Artificial Intelligence, Available at:
Document Classification: Public 9 TLP:
--- Page 10 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
COCOCCCCCE سس
execution to achieve specific objectives. Core Generative AI components may include but not
limited to:
1. AI Model Components
The component responsible for processing input, performing inference, and generating
outputs. This may include large language model (LLM), multimodal models, or other AI
models supporting the intended AI capabilities.
2. Data and Knowledge Repositories Components
The data repositories and knowledge sources utilized by the AI systems, including enterprise
documents, databases, knowledge bases, and other internal or external data sources.
3. Retrieval and Context Management Components
This component is responsible for retrieving relevant information and providing contextual
data to the AI model to improve response quality, accuracy and relevance. These capabilities
may be implemented through retrieval mechanisms including Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) architectures.
4. Application and interaction layer Components
The interfaces through which users and external systems interact with the AI system,
including chat interfaces, user prompts virtual assistant and APIs.
AI systems incorporating agentic capabilities may include additional component that enable
autonomous or semi-autonomous execution of task beyond content generation. Examples of
such components are- but not limited to:
5. Planning Components
This component is responsible for decomposing objectives into smaller tasks, determining
execution sequences and coordinating task completion.
6. Memory Components
10
Document Classification: Public TLP:
--- Page 11 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Sooo
This component maintains contextual information, historical interaction, intermediate
result and task related information to support continuity and decision making through task
execution.
7. Tool Integration Components
This component enables interaction with external tools, applications, services, databases,
APIs, enterprise systems and standardized integration protocols to support task execution
and information retrieval, this may include components such as Model Context Protocol
(MCP) server, API gateways, connectors, plugins and service adapters that allow AI models
or agents to securely access approved tools and data sources.
Figure (2) illustrates some of the components of Generative and Agentic AI systems and the
need for their components to interact outside of AI systems.
Sample of Al System Components
Agentic Al Systems Components
Tool Integration Planning
Components Components
Generative Al Systems M
Components (Learning and emory
inferencing Components) Components
Generative Al Systems Components
Data and Knowledge Al Model
Repositories Components
Application and Retrieval  Context
Interaction Components Management Components
8 Components that need to interact outside Al systems i  Component that interact within the Al systems only
Figure 2: Some of the Components of Generative and Agentic Al Systems
Overview of Major Al Cybersecurity Threats
As using artificial intelligence (AI) brings transformative capabilities to entities, it also
introduces a set of cybersecurity threats that must be managed and mitigated. As AI systems
rely on large volumes of data, complex algorithms, and interconnected compute environments,
Document Classification: Public 11 TLP: Clear
--- Page 12 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
oo
they create a new set of specialized attack surfaces that can be exploited by attackers. This new
set of specialized attack surfaces includes data poisoning, model inversion, evasion attacks, and
supply-chain compromises of training datasets or model repositories. Because AI decisions
often drive critical processes, any manipulation or leakage of the underlying models can result
in misinformation, unauthorized actions, or loss of confidentiality, integrity or availability of
sensitive information. Effective threat mitigation therefore requires a holistic approach that
includes secure data handling, robust model governance, continuous monitoring for anomalous
behavior, rigorous testing against adversarial attacks, in alignment with established
cybersecurity controls such as the Essential Cybersecurity Controls (ECC). Figure (3) showcases
a multitude of attack threats that might be used to target AI systems.
Non exhaustive
Evasion Membership  Model Model 0 A
Data poisoning All attack 8 interference - exfiltration ص inversion عملا ف (PEST
Unauthorized Injection Unauthorized Infer whether a Extract or replicate Unauthorized Alter the model or its
of malicious or Manipulation of input specific data sample maliciously a models recovery of sensitive training pipeline
corrupted data into data with was used in model functionality by training data features directly to manipulate
training (or continuous imperceptible training by analyzing systematically by exploiting model its behaviour without
learning) datasets to perturbations to cause  model responses to querying it or copying outputs and modifying the
degrade model integrity the model to produce crafted queries. its parameters confidence signals training data
or induce targeted incorrect outputs at
misclassification inference time
Training data  Model so Sensitive 7 Prompt Output
leak input leak  injection 4 injection attack -
Steal model Gain unauthorized Compromise the Expose confidential Embed malicious Generate model
parameters or access to sensitive confidentiality of training data or instructions within outputs containing
architecture from training or test sensitive input data copyrighted content input prompts to executable or
development or datasets provided to the model through normal or override system malicious code that
production during operation adversarial model constraints and triggers downstream
environments outputs induce unintended system vulnerabilities
behavior
Model sub-component under attack (9 Training data (Model artefact  Inference input  Inference output
oe Model  e Al applications 9و
Figure 3: Al Cybersecurity Threats
Document Classification: Public 12 TLP: Clear
--- Page 13 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Al Cybersecurity Guidelines Domains and Structure
Main Domains and Subdomains
Table (1) below shows the Main Domains and Subdomains of AI cybersecurity Guidelines.
Cybersecurity in Information and
Cybersecurity Risk Management
Technology Project Management
1. Cybersecurity
Governance
Cybersecurity Awareness and
Cybersecurity in Human Resources
Training Program
Asset Management Identity and Access Management
Network Security Management Data and Information Protection
Backup and Recovery Management Vulnerability Management
2. Cybersecurity
Defense
Cybersecurity Event Logs and
Penetration Testing
Monitoring Management
Web Application Security
3. Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity Resilience Aspects of Business Continuity Management (BCM)
Resilience
4. Third-Part
y Third-Party Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Table 1: Main Domains and Subdomains of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Document Classification: Public 13 TLP: Clear
--- Page 14 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
i
AICG Documentation Structure
The AICG itself is referred to as described in Figure (4) and Figure (5).
Al Cybersecurity Year of Issuance
Guidelines
Figure 4: AICG Coding Scheme
Subdomain No.
Guidelines No.
Figure 5: AICG Structure
Document Classification: Public 14 TLP: Clear
--- Page 15 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Table (2) below shows the methodological structure of the Guidelines.
- Name of Main Domain
Reference number
Name of Subdomain
of the Main Domain
Objective
Guidelines
Guidelines
Guidelines Clauses
Reference Number
Table 2: AICG Structure
Document Classification: Public 15 TLP: Clear
--- Page 16 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
oo
Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Q-  Cybersecurity Governance
Cybersecurity Risk Management
To ensure that AI cybersecurity risks are managed in a methodological approach in order to
Objective  protect the entitys information and technology assets as per organizational policies and
procedures, and related laws and regulations.
Guideline
Define, document, approve and implement cybersecurity risk management practices across
1-1-1
all the lifecycle of AI systems.
Conduct a cybersecurity risk assessment to classify AI agents actions by potential impact,
1-1-2
likelihood and reversibility, and apply appropriate safeguards.
Cybersecurity in Information and Technology Project Management
To ensure that AI cybersecurity requirements are included in information and technology
Objective
project management practices throughout the lifecycle of AI systems.
Guideline
Implement security by design across the AI systems lifecycle, along with defining and
implementing procedures to secure AI development and operation, from the definition of
1-2-1 cybersecurity requirements and secure data acquisition, through model training, fine-tuning,
prompt configuration, evaluation, deployment, operation and maintenance to
decommissioning.
Treat the data retrieved from external tools, memory bases, or third-party APIs as untrusted,
1-2-2 and apply strict validation and sanitization to any data injected into the context window to
prevent the execution of malicious commands disguised as data.
Avoid model retraining or uncontrolled learning directly in production, unless explicitly
mes justified with cybersecurity risk assessed and protected by specific controls.
Continuously asses the cybersecurity capabilities and resilience of AI agents throughout the
1-2-4
development lifecycle.
Document Classification: Public 16 TLP: Clear
--- Page 17 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
ee
Conduct a systematic cybersecurity code review, cybersecurity testing and formal approval
1-2-5 of all Al-generated code to address cybersecurity risks before use in development,
integration or production environments.
Establish and enforce approval processes for high-impact AI prior to production
1-2-6
deployment, ensuring cybersecurity risks are assessed, addressed.
Implement a graduated autonomy to increase AI agent independence, ensuring continuous
1-2-7 human oversight and oversight to monitor and understand cybersecurity-related decisions
and actions.
1-3 Cybersecurity in Human Resources
To ensure that AI cybersecurity risks and requirements related to personnel are managed
Objective  efficiently prior to employment, during employment and after terminationseparation as per
organizational policies and procedures, and related laws and regulations.
Guidelines
Conduct screening or vetting on personnel who have access to internal AI systems
1-3-1 components or who have privileged access on production AI environments, or other AI
functions that have high risks.
Ensure confidentiality, acceptable use, and secure handling obligations for all personnel whose
1-3-2
roles may expose sensitive data, prompts, outputs, or configurations through AI systems.
1-4 Cybersecurity Awareness and Training Program
To ensure that personnel and users receive Al-specific cybersecurity awareness and training
Objective
commensurate with their roles and the cybersecurity risks associated with AI systems.
Guidelines
Include AI cybersecurity training for personnel involved in AI system development,
configuration, or operation, including:
Secure prompt design, tool design, output handling, and cybersecurity incident
1-4-1
reporting.
Secure handling of sensitive data in prompts and uploads, recognition of Al-related
cybersecurity threats related to AI (such as prompt injection or data leakage), and
Document Classification: Public 17 TLP: Clear
--- Page 18 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
oo
validation of outputs, in addition to the awareness of relevant cybersecurity measures
to protect from the potential security risks.
Include AI system cybersecurity awareness within the entity overall cybersecurity awareness
program, including:
Secure use of prompt and user provided input data when interacting and the Al
1-4-2 system, including the avoidance of sensitive information in prompt and inputs which
can cause cybersecurity risks such as data leakage.
Cybersecurity risks associated with Al-generated code and the required review and
testing controls before use.
Document Classification: Public TLP:
--- Page 19 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
O-  ovrersecurity Defense
To ensure that the entity have an accurate and detailed inventory of Al-related
Objective  information and technology assets in order to support cybersecurity and operational
requirements and maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of those assets.
Guidelines
2-1-1 Establish and continuously update an inventory of assets for all AI system components.
Define asset owners and lifecycle status for assets for all AI system components, including
2-1-2 experimental, pilot, pre-production, approved production and restricted and retired assets,
services or configurations.
Define and implement procedures for the assets and components after using AI systems
2-1-3
and during decommissioning such as the secure disposal for AI systems.
2-2 Identity and Access Management
To ensure the secure and restricted logical access to Al-related information and technology
Objective  assets in order to prevent unauthorized access and allow only authorized access for users,
services and AI agents necessary to accomplish assigned tasks.
Guidelines
Define a role-based permissions and authorization policies for human users, service
accounts, and AI agents while ensure applying identity and access control principles
2 (Need-to Know and Need-to-Use principle, Least Privilege principle, and Segregation of
Duties principle).
Implement periodic review of identities, access rights, tokens, and service accounts used
2-2-2
by AI systems.
Ensure the ability to control authorizations in order to mitigate AI cybersecurity risks
2-2-3 including rate limiting, usage threshold and other mechanisms to mitigate model
extraction and data leakage risks.
2-3 Network Security Management
Document Classification: Public 19 TLP: Clear
--- Page 20 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
ee
To ensure the cybersecurity of network paths, interfaces and communications used by AI
Objective systems, including training, tuning, retrieval and inference traffic, and communications
with external tools and services.
Guidelines
Segment the network internal AI system components from external components, not
explicitly required for their operation and restricting protocols, ports, destinations and
a egress paths to approved requirements only, in order to enforce trust boundaries and
detect anomalies.
Segment the network external AI system components and restrict the access and the
communications, only as needed for operational purposes, while applying appropriate
2-3-2
controls to protect internet-facing systems, reduce the attack surface and detect unusual
situations.
2-4 Data and Information Protection
To ensure the protection of data and information used by, generated by or otherwise
Objective
associated with AI systems throughout their lifecycle.
Guidelines
Protect the confidentiality and integrity of AI system components data, including training
data, evaluation data, model weights, prompts, embeddings, logs, contexts and outputs at
2-4-1
rest, in transit and during processing, and restrict access and disclosure to authorized
personnel only.
Protect the data classified in AI systems at rest, in transit and during processing, based on
2-4-2
its classification in accordance to the relevant laws and regulations requirements.
Protect AI memory components from unauthorized modification and validate stored
2-4-3
content to prevent memory poisoning and manipulation.
Develop guardrails to detect and prevent malicious input, unauthorized actions, sensitive
2-4-4 information disclosure and any other cybersecurity threats and ensure testing before
production use and after material changes.
2-5 Backup and Recovery Management
Document Classification: Public 20 TLP: Clear
--- Page 21 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
ee
Objective  To ensure secure backup, recovery and rollback arrangements for AI systems.
Guidelines
Implement secure backup and recovery mechanisms to ensure availability, integrity, and
2-5-1
a timely restoration of AI systems.
2-5-2 Test backup, recovery and rollback procedures for AI systems periodically.
2-6 Vulnerability Management
To ensure that vulnerabilities affecting AI models, applications, infrastructure,
Objective  dependencies and integrations are identified, assessed, remediated and communicated in
a timely manner.
Guidelines
2-6-1 Identify, track and remediate vulnerabilities in AI systems
Maintain subscriptions or equivalent access to relevant threat and vulnerability
2-6-2 intelligence affecting AI systems, and monitor developer security advisories, service status
updates, cybersecurity alerts.
Disable or restrict vulnerable AI features, until remediation is validated, when a
2-6-3
vulnerability is detected.
2-7 Penetration Testing
To assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity guidelines protecting AI systems by simulating
relevant attack techniques and threat scenarios, in order to identify exploitable
Objective   cybersecurity vulnerabilities, misconfigurations, and weaknesses prior to deployment and
periodically thereafter, commensurate with their cybersecurity risk, complexity, and
exposure.
Guidelines
Conduct AI system components and AI system specific penetration testing activities
2-7-1 before deployment and periodically thereafter, including testing outputs and system
behavior.
Conduct AI system testing through different methods such as red teaming and adversarial
2-7-2
evaluation and validate human override.
Document Classification: Public 21 TLP: Clear
--- Page 22 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
ee
Address the discovered findings and vulnerabilities by cybersecurity testing and evaluation
2-7-3
and define the proper remediation procedures.
2-8 Cybersecurity Event Logs and Monitoring Management
To ensure that logging, monitoring and detection capabilities cover Al-specific events,
Objective  actions, changes and anomalies needed to support compliance, cybersecurity incident
response and continuous assurance.
Guidelines
Log and monitor cybersecurity-relevant AI components logs, including authentication and
2-8-1 access events, privileged actions, dataset and knowledge source access, prompt
configuration changes, plugin and tool invocations.
Log and monitor actions taken by AI systems and cybersecurity-relevant events, including
2-8-2 data uploads and downloads, and AI-initiated actions that may impact the confidentiality,
integrity or availability.
Protect, retain and analyze cybersecurity-relevant Al-related logs to support compliance,
2-8-3
cybersecurity incident response, investigations and vulnerability remediation.
2-9 Web Application Security
To ensure that Al-enabled applications, APIs, web interfaces, agents, plugins and related
Objective
integrations are designed, developed, configured and operated securely.
Guidelines
Protect AI systems web applications and services using secure communication protocols,
2-9-1 request rate limiting, denial-of-service protections, controlled egress points, and filters to
block unsafe channels.
Document Classification: Public 22 TLP: Clear
--- Page 23 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Cybersecurity Resilience
3-1 Cybersecurity Resilience Aspects of Business Continuity Management (BCM)
Objective To ensure that AI systems are addressed within business continuity and disaster recovery
arrangements in a manner commensurate with their importance and dependencies.
Guidelines
Define a rollback, safe shutdown and manual alternatives for AI systems in the event of a
3-1-1
cybersecurity incident, where applicable.
-  Third-Party Cybersecurity
Objective  To ensure that cybersecurity risks arising from third-party entities, components and services
used in the AI lifecycle are identified, assessed, managed and monitored on an ongoing basis.
Guidelines
Assess and Manage cybersecurity risks that may arises from the use of AI systems by third
4-1-1
parties and entities
Assess and manage the cybersecurity of third-party related AI third party components in AI
4-1-2
systems components before use and on an ongoing basis.
Ensure AI Developers compliance with the entity AI cybersecurity requirements is
4-1-3
contractually established, and monitoring and periodically assessing such compliance.
Define exit, portability and secure disposal requirements for AI system components upon
4-1-4
developer change or contract termination.
Document Classification: Public 23 TLP: Clear
--- Page 24 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
oo
Annexes
Annex No. (A): Terminologies and Definitions
Table 3 below shows some of the terminologies contained herein, and the meanings as
described thereto.
Term Definition
A software entity or capability that can perceive input, invoke tools or external functions, and
Al Agent
act with some degree of autonomy to achieve specified objectives.
According The Saudi Data  AI Authority (SDAIA), AI systems are Software systems that rely
on advanced technologies to predict, generate content, provide recommendations, or make
decisions, with varying levels of autonomy, depending on the data and the context in which
they operate. This term includes AI enabled services and all the AI system components
Al System (generative and agentic AI systems) defined in this document such as AI Models Components,
Data and Knowledge Repositories Components, Retrieval and Context Management
Component, Application and interaction layer Components, Planning Components, Memory
Components and Tool Integration Components.
According to The Saudi Data  AI Authority (SDAIA), Agentic AI is a software system based
on AI algorithms, characterized by key features such as perceiving the surrounding
Agentic Al
environment, interpreting information, setting goals, and making decisions autonomously
without constant human supervision.
According to The Saudi Data  AI Authority (SDAIA), Generative AI is A branch of artificial
Generative
Al
intelligence that relies on machine learning techniques and deep neural networks to simulate
the human ability to produce original data and content.
Numerical representations of data used by AI systems for retrieval, similarity matching or other
Embeddings
model-driven operations.
Additional training or adaptation of a pre-existing AI model using task-specific or entity-
Fine-tuning
specific data.
The process by which an AI model produces an output from input data, prompts or other
Inference
context.
Document Classification: Public 24 TLP:
--- Page 25 ---
Draft of Al Cybersecurity Guidelines
Definition
Model
Weights
The learned parameters of an AI model that influence its behavior and outputs.
Input text, instructions or context provided to an AI model to influence its response or action.
Prompt
Prompt An attack technique that manipulates prompts, context or retrieved content to alter model
Injection behavior, bypass controls or induce unauthorized actions.
YP
Training
Data used to train, pre-train, fine-tune or otherwise adapt an AI model.
Data
An external function, connector, service or interface that an AI system can invoke or use during
Tool  Plugin
operation.
Table 3: Terms and Definitions
Annex No. (B): List of the Abbreviations
Table 4 below shows the abbreviations used in this document.
Abbreviation Meaning
Al Artificial Intelligence
AICG AI Cybersecurity Guidelines
API Application Programming Interface
BCM Business Continuity Management
ECC Essential Cybersecurity Controls
LLM Large Language Model
MCP Model Context Protocol
NCA National Cybersecurity Authority
RAG Retrieval Augmented Generation
TLP Traffic Light Protocol
Table 4: List of Abbreviations
Document Classification: Public 25 TLP:
--- Page 26 ---
National Cybersecurity Authority