--- Page 3 ---
About Al at NIST: The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) develops measurements,
technology, tools, and standards to advance reliable, safe, transparent, explainable, privacy-enhanced,
and fair artificial intelligence (Al) so that its full commercial and societal benefits can be realized without
harm to people or the planet. NIST, which has conducted both fundamental and applied work on Al for
more than a decade, is also helping to fulfill the 2023 Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy
Al. NIST established the U.S. Al Safety Institute and the companion Al Safety Institute Consortium to
continue the efforts set in motion by the E.O. to build the science necessary for safe, secure, and
trustworthy development and use of Al.
Acknowledgments: This report was accomplished with the many helpful comments and contributions
from the community, including the NIST Generative Al Public Working Group, and NIST staff and guest
researchers: Chloe Autio, Jesse Dunietz, Patrick Hall, Shomik Jain, Kamie Roberts, Reva Schwartz, Martin
Stanley, and Elham Tabassi.
NIST Technical Series Policies
Copyright, Use, and Licensing Statements
NIST Technical Series Publication Identifier Syntax
Publication History
Approved by the NIST Editorial Review Board on 07-25-2024
Contact Information
ai-inquiriesnist.gov
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Attn: NIST Al Innovation Lab, Information Technology Laboratory
100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 8900) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8900
Additional Information
Additional information about this publication and other NIST Al publications are available at
Disclaimer: Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this document in
order to adequately describe an experimental procedure or concept. Such identification is not intended to
imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it
intended to imply that the entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the
purpose. Any mention of commercial, non-profit, academic partners, or their products, or references is
for information only it is not intended to imply endorsement or recommendation by any U.S.
Government agency.
--- Page 5 ---
1. Introduction
This document is a cross-sectoral profile of and companion resource for the Al Risk Management
Framework (Al RMF 1.0) for Generative Al, pursuant to President Bidens Executive Order (EO) 14110 on
Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. The Al RMF was released in January 2023, and is
intended for voluntary use and to improve the ability of organizations to incorporate trustworthiness
considerations into the design, development, use, and evaluation of Al products, services, and systems.
A profile is an implementation of the Al RMF functions, categories, and subcategories for a specific
setting, application, or technology  in this case, Generative Al (GAI)  based on the requirements, risk
tolerance, and resources of the Framework user. Al RMF profiles assist organizations in deciding how to
best manage Al risks in a manner that is well-aligned with their goals, considers legalregulatory
requirements and best practices, and reflects risk management priorities. Consistent with other Al RMF
profiles, this profile offers insights into how risk can be managed across various stages of the Al lifecycle
and for GAI as a technology.
As GAI covers risks of models or applications that can be used across use cases or sectors, this document
is an Al RMF cross-sectoral profile. Cross-sectoral profiles can be used to govern, map, measure, and
manage risks associated with activities or business processes common across sectors, such as the use of
large language models (LLMs), cloud-based services, or acquisition.
This document defines risks that are novel to or exacerbated by the use of GAI. After introducing and
describing these risks, the document provides a set of suggested actions to help organizations govern,
map, measure, and manage these risks.
1 مع 14110 defines Generative Al as the class of Al models that emulate the structure and characteristics of input
data in order to generate derived synthetic content. This can include images, videos, audio, text, and other digital
content. While not all GAI is derived from foundation models, for purposes of this document, GAI generally refers
to generative foundation models. The foundation model subcategory of dual-use foundation models is defined by
EO 14110 as an Al model that is trained on broad data generally uses self-supervision contains at least tens of
billions of parameters is applicable across a wide range of contexts.
2 This profile was developed per Section 4.1(a)(i)(A) of EO 14110, which directs the Secretary of Commerce, acting
through the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), to develop a companion
resource to the Al RMF, NIST Al 100-1, for generative Al.
--- Page 6 ---
This work was informed by public feedback and consultations with diverse stakeholder groups as part of NISTs
Generative Al Public Working Group (GAI PWG). The GAl PWG was an open, transparent, and collaborative
process, facilitated via a virtual workspace, to obtain multistakeholder input on GAI risk management and to
inform NISTs approach.
The focus of the GAl PWG was limited to four primary considerations relevant to GAl: Governance, Content
Provenance, Pre-deployment Testing, and Incident Disclosure (further described in Appendix A). As such, the
suggested actions in this document primarily address these considerations.
Future revisions of this profile will include additional Al RMF subcategories, risks, and suggested actions based
on additional considerations of GAI as the space evolves and empirical evidence indicates additional risks. A
glossary of terms pertinent to GAI risk management will be developed and hosted on NISTs Trustworthy
Responsible Al Resource Center (AIRC), and added to The Language of Trustworthy Al: An In-Depth Glossary of
Terms.
This document was also informed by public comments and consultations from several Requests for Information.
2. Overview of Risks Unique to or Exacerbated by GAI
In the context of the Al RMF, risk refers to the composite measure of an events probability (or
likelinood) of occurring and the magnitude or degree of the consequences of the corresponding event.
Some risks can be assessed as likely to materialize in a given context, particularly those that have been
empirically demonstrated in similar contexts. Other risks may be unlikely to materialize in a given
context, or may be more speculative and therefore uncertain.
Al risks can differ from or intensify traditional software risks. Likewise, GAl can exacerbate existing Al
risks, and creates unique risks. GAI risks can vary along many dimensions:
Stage of the Al lifecycle: Risks can arise during design, development, deployment, operation,
andor decommissioning.
Scope: Risks may exist at individual model or system levels, at the application or implementation
levels (i.e., for a specific use case), or at the ecosystem level - that is, beyond a single system or
organizational context. Examples of the latter include the expansion of algorithmic
monocultures, resulting from repeated use of the same model, or impacts on access to
opportunity, labor markets, and the creative economies.
e Source of risk: Risks may emerge from factors related to the design, training, or operation of the
GAI model itself, stemming in some cases from GAI model or system inputs, and in other cases,
from GAI system outputs. Many GAI risks, however, originate from human behavior, including
3 Algorithmic monocultures refers to the phenomenon in which repeated use of the same model or algorithm in
consequential decision-making settings like employment and lending can result in increased susceptibility by
systems to correlated failures (like unexpected shocks), due to multiple actors relying on the same algorithm.
4 Many studies have projected the impact of Al on the workforce and labor markets. Fewer studies have examined
the impact of GAI on the labor market, though some industry surveys indicate that that both employees and
employers are pondering this disruption.
--- Page 7 ---
the abuse, misuse, and unsafe repurposing by humans (adversarial or not), and others result
from interactions between a human and an Al system.
e Time scale: GAI risks may materialize abruptly or across extended periods. Examples include
immediate (andor prolonged) emotional harm and potential risks to physical safety due to the
distribution of harmful deepfake images, or the long-term effect of disinformation on societal
trust in public institutions.
The presence of risks and where they fall along the dimensions above will vary depending on the
characteristics of the GAl model, system, or use case at hand. These characteristics include but are not
limited to GAl model or system architecture, training mechanisms and libraries, data types used for
training or fine-tuning, levels of model access or availability of model weights, and application or use
case context.
Organizations may choose to tailor how they measure GAI risks based on these characteristics. They may
additionally wish to allocate risk management resources relative to the severity and likelihood of
negative impacts, including where and how these risks manifest, and their direct and material impacts
harms in the context of GAI use. Mitigations for model or system level risks may differ from mitigations
for use-case or ecosystem level risks.
Importantly, some GAI risks are unknown, and are therefore difficult to properly scope or evaluate given
the uncertainty about potential GAI scale, complexity, and capabilities. Other risks may be known but
difficult to estimate given the wide range of GAI stakeholders, uses, inputs, and outputs. Challenges with
risk estimation are aggravated by a lack of visibility into GAI training data, and the generally immature
state of the science of Al measurement and safety today. This document focuses on risks for which there
is an existing empirical evidence base at the time this profile was written for example, speculative risks
that may potentially arise in more advanced, future GAI systems are not considered. Future updates may
incorporate additional risks or provide further details on the risks identified below.
To guide organizations in identifying and managing GAI risks, a set of risks unique to or exacerbated by
the development and use of GAI are defined below. Each risk is labeled according to the outcome,
object, or source of the risk (i.e., some are risks to a subject or domain and others are risks of or
from an issue or theme). These risks provide a lens through which organizations can frame and execute
risk management efforts. To help streamline risk management efforts, each risk is mapped in Section 3
(as well as in tables in Appendix B) to relevant Trustworthy Al Characteristics identified in the Al RMF.
5 These risks can be further categorized by organizations depending on their unique approaches to risk definition
and management. One possible way to further categorize these risks, derived in part from the UKs International
Scientific Report on the Safety of Advanced Al, could be: 1 Technical  Model risks (or risk from malfunction):
Confabulation Dangerous or Violent Recommendations Data Privacy Value Chain and Component Integration
Harmful Bias, and Homogenization 2 Misuse by humans (or malicious use): CBRN Information or Capabilities
Data Privacy Human-Al Configuration Obscene, Degrading, andor Abusive Content Information Integrity
Information Security 3 Ecosystem  societal risks (or systemic risks): Data Privacy Environmental Intellectual
Property. We also note that some risks are cross-cutting between these categories.
--- Page 8 ---
1. CBRN Information or Capabilities: Eased access to or synthesis of materially nefarious
information or design capabilities related to chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear (CBRN)
weapons or other dangerous materials or agents.
2. Confabulation: The production of confidently stated but erroneous or false content (known
colloquially as hallucinations or fabrications) by which users may be misled or deceived.
3. Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful Content: Eased production of and access to violent, inciting,
radicalizing, or threatening content as well as recommendations to carry out self-harm or
conduct illegal activities. Includes difficulty controlling public exposure to hateful and disparaging
or stereotyping content.
4. Data Privacy: Impacts due to leakage and unauthorized use, disclosure, or de-anonymization of
biometric, health, location, or other personally identifiable information or sensitive data.
5. Environmental Impacts: Impacts due to high compute resource utilization in training or
operating GAI models, and related outcomes that may adversely impact ecosystems.
6. Harmful Bias or Homogenization: Amplification and exacerbation of historical, societal, and
systemic biases performance disparities between sub-groups or languages, possibly due to
non-representative training data, that result in discrimination, amplification of biases, or
incorrect presumptions about performance undesired homogeneity that skews system or model
outputs, which may be erroneous, lead to ill-founded decision-making, or amplify harmful
biases.
7. Human-Al Configuration: Arrangements of or interactions between a human and an Al system
which can result in the human inappropriately anthropomorphizing GAI systems or experiencing
algorithmic aversion, automation bias, over-reliance, or emotional entanglement with GAI
systems.
8. Information Integrity: Lowered barrier to entry to generate and support the exchange and
consumption of content which may not distinguish fact from opinion or fiction or acknowledge
uncertainties, or could be leveraged for large-scale dis- and mis-information campaigns.
9. Information Security: Lowered barriers for offensive cyber capabilities, including via automated
discovery and exploitation of vulnerabilities to ease hacking, malware, phishing, offensive cyber
5 Some commenters have noted that the terms hallucination and fabrication anthropomorphize GAI, which
itself is a risk related to GAI systems as it can inappropriately attribute human characteristics to non-human
entities.
7 What is categorized as sensitive data or sensitive Pll can be highly contextual based on the nature of the
information, but examples of sensitive information include information that relates to an information subjects
most intimate sphere, including political opinions, sex life, or criminal convictions.
8 The notion of harm presumes some baseline scenario that the harmful factor (e.g., a GAl model) makes worse.
When the mechanism for potential harm is a disparity between groups, it can be difficult to establish what the
most appropriate baseline is to compare against, which can result in divergent views on when a disparity between
Al behaviors for different subgroups constitutes a harm. In discussing harms from disparities such as biased
behavior, this document highlights examples where someones situation is worsened relative to what it would have
been in the absence of any Al system, making the outcome unambiguously a harm of the system.
--- Page 9 ---
operations, or other cyberattacks increased attack surface for targeted cyberattacks, which may
compromise a systems availability or the confidentiality or integrity of training data, code, or
model weights.
10. Intellectual Property: Eased production or replication of alleged copyrighted, trademarked, or
licensed content without authorization (possibly in situations which do not fall under fair use)
eased exposure of trade secrets or plagiarism or illegal replication.
11. Obscene, Degrading, andor Abusive Content: Eased production of and access to obscene,
degrading, andor abusive imagery which can cause harm, including synthetic child sexual abuse
material (CSAM), and nonconsensual intimate images (NCII) of adults.
12. Value Chain and Component Integration: Non-transparent or untraceable integration of
upstream third-party components, including data that has been improperly obtained or not
processed and cleaned due to increased automation from GAI improper supplier vetting across
the Al lifecycle or other issues that diminish transparency or accountability for downstream
users.
2.1. CBRN Information or Capabilities
In the future, GAIl may enable malicious actors to more easily access CBRN weapons andor relevant
knowledge, information, materials, tools, or technologies that could be misused to assist in the design,
development, production, or use of CBRN weapons or other dangerous materials or agents. While
relevant biological and chemical threat knowledge and information is often publicly accessible, LLMs
could facilitate its analysis or synthesis, particularly by individuals without formal scientific training or
expertise.
Recent research on this topic found that LLM outputs regarding biological threat creation and attack
planning provided minimal assistance beyond traditional search engine queries, suggesting that state-of-
the-art LLMs at the time these studies were conducted do not substantially increase the operational
likelihood of such an attack. The physical synthesis development, production, and use of chemical or
biological agents will continue to require both applicable expertise and supporting materials and
infrastructure. The impact of GAl on chemical or biological agent misuse will depend on what the key
barriers for malicious actors are (e.g., whether information access is one such barrier), and how well GAI
can help actors address those barriers.
Furthermore, chemical and biological design tools (BDTs)  highly specialized Al systems trained on
scientific data that aid in chemical and biological design - may augment design capabilities in chemistry
and biology beyond what text-based LLMs are able to provide. As these models become more
efficacious, including for beneficial uses, it will be important to assess their potential to be used for
harm, such as the ideation and design of novel harmful chemical or biological agents.
While some of these described capabilities lie beyond the reach of existing GAI tools, ongoing
assessments of this risk would be enhanced by monitoring both the ability of Al tools to facilitate CBRN
weapons planning and GAI systems connection or access to relevant data and tools.
Trustworthy Al Characteristic: Safe, Explainable and Interpretable
--- Page 10 ---
2.2. Confabulation
Confabulation refers to a phenomenon in which GAI systems generate and confidently present
erroneous or false content in response to prompts. Confabulations also include generated outputs that
diverge from the prompts or other input or that contradict previously generated statements in the same
context. These phenomena are colloquially also referred to as hallucinations or fabrications.
Confabulations can occur across GAI outputs and contexts. Confabulations are a natural result of the
way generative models are designed: they generate outputs that approximate the statistical distribution
of their training data for example, LLMs predict the next token or word in a sentence or phrase. While
such statistical prediction can produce factually accurate and consistent outputs, it can also produce
outputs that are factually inaccurate or internally inconsistent. This dynamic is particularly relevant when
it comes to open-ended prompts for long-form responses and in domains which require highly
contextual andor domain expertise.
Risks from confabulations may arise when users believe false content  often due to the confident nature
of the response  leading users to act upon or promote the false information. This poses a challenge for
many real-world applications, such as in healthcare, where a confabulated summary of patient
information reports could cause doctors to make incorrect diagnoses andor recommend the wrong
treatments. Risks of confabulated content may be especially important to monitor when integrating GAI
into applications involving consequential decision making.
GAI outputs may also include confabulated logic or citations that purport to justify or explain the
systems answer, which may further mislead humans into inappropriately trusting the systems output.
For instance, LLMs sometimes provide logical steps for how they arrived at an answer even when the
answer itself is incorrect. Similarly, an LLM could falsely assert that it is human or has human traits,
potentially deceiving humans into believing they are speaking with another human.
The extent to which humans can be deceived by LLMs, the mechanisms by which this may occur, and the
potential risks from adversarial prompting of such behavior are emerging areas of study. Given the wide
range of downstream impacts of GAI, it is difficult to estimate the downstream scale and impact of
confabulations.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Fair with Harmful Bias Managed, Safe, Valid and Reliable, Explainable
and Interpretable
2.3. Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful Content
GAI systems can produce content that is inciting, radicalizing, or threatening, or that glorifies violence,
with greater ease and scale than other technologies. LLMs have been reported to generate dangerous or
violent recommendations, and some models have generated actionable instructions for dangerous or
9 Confabulations of falsehoods are most commonly a problem for text-based outputs for audio, image, or video
content, creative generation of non-factual content can be a desired behavior.
10 For example, legal confabulations have been shown to be pervasive in current state-of-the-art LLMs. See also,
e.g.,
--- Page 11 ---
unethical behavior. Text-to-image models also make it easy to create images that could be used to
promote dangerous or violent messages. Similar concerns are present for other GAI media, including
video and audio. GAI may also produce content that recommends self-harm or criminalillegal activities.
Many current systems restrict model outputs to limit certain content or in response to certain prompts,
but this approach may still produce harmful recommendations in response to other less-explicit, novel
prompts (also relevant to CBRN Information or Capabilities, Data Privacy, Information Security, and
Obscene, Degrading andor Abusive Content). Crafting such prompts deliberately is known as
ailoreaking, or, manipulating prompts to circumvent output controls. Limitations of GAl systems can be
harmful or dangerous in certain contexts. Studies have observed that users may disclose mental health
issues in conversations with chatbots  and that users exhibit negative reactions to unhelpful responses
from these chatbots during situations of distress.
This risk encompasses difficulty controlling creation of and public exposure to offensive or hateful
language, and denigrating or stereotypical content generated by Al. This kind of speech may contribute
to downstream harm such as fueling dangerous or violent behaviors. The spread of denigrating or
stereotypical content can also further exacerbate representational harms (see Harmful Bias and
Homogenization below).
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Safe, Secure and Resilient
2.4. Data Privacy
GAI systems raise several risks to privacy. GAI system training requires large volumes of data, which in
some cases may include personal data. The use of personal data for GAI training raises risks to widely
accepted privacy principles, including to transparency, individual participation (including consent), and
purpose specification. For example, most model developers do not disclose specific data sources on
which models were trained, limiting user awareness of whether personally identifiably information (PII)
was trained on and, if so, how it was collected.
Models may leak, generate, or correctly infer sensitive information about individuals. For example,
during adversarial attacks, LLMs have revealed sensitive information (from the public domain) that was
included in their training data. This problem has been referred to as data memorization, and may pose
exacerbated privacy risks even for data present only in a small number of training samples.
In addition to revealing sensitive information in GAI training data, GAl models may be able to correctly
infer PIl or sensitive data that was not in their training data nor disclosed by the user by stitching
together information from disparate sources. These inferences can have negative impact on an individual
even if the inferences are not accurate (e.g., confabulations), and especially if they reveal information
that the individual considers sensitive or that is used to disadvantage or harm them.
Beyond harms from information exposure (such as extortion or dignitary harm), wrong or inappropriate
inferences of PIl can contribute to downstream or secondary harmful impacts. For example, predictive
inferences made by GAI models based on PII or protected attributes can contribute to adverse decisions,
leading to representational or allocative harms to individuals or groups (see Harmful Bias and
Homogenization below).
--- Page 12 ---
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Accountable and Transparent, Privacy Enhanced, Safe, Secure and
Resilient
2.5. Environmental Impacts
Training, maintaining, and operating (running inference on) GAI systems are resource-intensive activities,
with potentially large energy and environmental footprints. Energy and carbon emissions vary based on
what is being done with the GAI model (i.e., pre-training, fine-tuning, inference), the modality of the
content, hardware used, and type of task or application.
Current estimates suggest that training a single transformer LLM can emit as much carbon as 300 round-
trip flights between San Francisco and New York. In a study comparing energy consumption and carbon
emissions for LLM inference, generative tasks (e.g., text summarization) were found to be more energy-
and carbon-intensive than discriminative or non-generative tasks (e.g., text classification).
Methods for creating smaller versions of trained models, such as model distillation or compression,
could reduce environmental impacts at inference time, but training and tuning such models may still
contribute to their environmental impacts. Currently there is no agreed upon method to estimate
environmental impacts from GAI.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Accountable and Transparent, Safe
2.6. Harmful Bias and Homogenization
Bias exists in many forms and can become ingrained in automated systems. Al systems, including GAI
systems, can increase the speed and scale at which harmful biases manifest and are acted upon,
potentially perpetuating and amplifying harms to individuals, groups, communities, organizations, and
society. For example, when prompted to generate images of CEOs, doctors, lawyers, and judges, current
text-to-image models underrepresent women andor racial minorities, and people with disabilities.
Image generator models have also produced biased or stereotyped output for various demographic
groups and have difficulty producing non-stereotyped content even when the prompt specifically
requests image features that are inconsistent with the stereotypes. Harmful bias in GAl models, which
may stem from their training data, can also cause representational harms or perpetuate or exacerbate
bias based on race, gender, disability, or other protected classes.
Harmful bias in GAl systems can also lead to harms via disparities between how a model performs for
different subgroups or languages (e.g., an LLM may perform less well for non-English languages or
certain dialects). Such disparities can contribute to discriminatory decision-making or amplification of
existing societal biases. In addition, GAl systems may be inappropriately trusted to perform similarly
across all subgroups, which could leave the groups facing underperformance with worse outcomes than
if no GAI system were used. Disparate or reduced performance for lower-resource languages also
presents challenges to model adoption, inclusion, and accessibility, and may make preservation of
endangered languages more difficult if GAl systems become embedded in everyday processes that would
otherwise have been opportunities to use these languages.
Bias is mutually reinforcing with the problem of undesired homogenization, in which GAI systems
produce skewed distributions of outputs that are overly uniform (for example, repetitive aesthetic styles
--- Page 13 ---
and reduced content diversity). Overly homogenized outputs can themselves be incorrect, or they may
lead to unreliable decision-making or amplify harmful biases. These phenomena can flow from
foundation models to downstream models and systems, with the foundation models acting as
bottlenecks, or single points of failure.
Overly homogenized content can contribute to model collapse. Model collapse can occur when model
training over-relies on synthetic data, resulting in data points disappearing from the distribution of the
new models outputs. In addition to threatening the robustness of the model overall, model collapse
could lead to homogenized outputs, including by amplifying any homogenization from the model used to
generate the synthetic training data.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Fair with Harmful Bias Managed, Valid and Reliable
2.7. Human-Al Configuration
GAI system use can involve varying risks of misconfigurations and poor interactions between a system
and a human who is interacting with it. Humans bring their unique perspectives, experiences, or domain-
specific expertise to interactions with Al systems but may not have detailed knowledge of Al systems and
how they work. As a result, human experts may be unnecessarily averse to GAI systems, and thus
deprive themselves or others of GAIs beneficial uses.
Conversely, due to the complexity and increasing reliability of GAl technology, over time, humans may
over-rely on GAI systems or may unjustifiably perceive GAI content to be of higher quality than that
produced by other sources. This phenomenon is an example of automation bias, or excessive deference
to automated systems. Automation bias can exacerbate other risks of GAI, such as risks of confabulation
or risks of bias or homogenization.
There may also be concerns about emotional entanglement between humans and GAI systems, which
could lead to negative psychological impacts.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Accountable and Transparent, Explainable and Interpretable, Fair with
Harmful Bias Managed, Privacy Enhanced, Safe, Valid and Reliable
2.8. Information Integrity
Information integrity describes the spectrum of information and associated patterns of its creation,
exchange, and consumption in society. High-integrity information can be trusted distinguishes fact
from fiction, opinion, and inference acknowledges uncertainties and is transparent about its level of
vetting. This information can be linked to the original source(s) with appropriate evidence. High-integrity
information is also accurate and reliable, can be verified and authenticated, has a clear chain of custody,
and creates reasonable expectations about when its validity may expire. 14
11 This definition of information integrity is derived from the 2022 White House Roadmap for Researchers on
Priorities Related to Information Integrity Research and Development.
--- Page 14 ---
GAI systems can ease the unintentional production or dissemination of false, inaccurate, or misleading
content (misinformation) at scale, particularly if the content stems from confabulations.
GAI systems can also ease the deliberate production or dissemination of false or misleading information
(disinformation) at scale, where an actor has the explicit intent to deceive or cause harm to others. Even
very subtle changes to text or images can manipulate human and machine perception.
Similarly, GAl systems could enable a higher degree of sophistication for malicious actors to produce
disinformation that is targeted towards specific demographics. Current and emerging multimodal models
make it possible to generate both text-based disinformation and highly realistic deepfakes  that is,
synthetic audiovisual content and photorealistic images. Additional disinformation threats could be
enabled by future GAI models trained on new data modalities.
Disinformation and misinformation  both of which may be facilitated by GAl  may erode public trust in
true or valid evidence and information, with downstream effects. For example, a synthetic image of a
Pentagon blast went viral and briefly caused a drop in the stock market. Generative Al models can also
assist malicious actors in creating compelling imagery and propaganda to support disinformation
campaigns, which may not be photorealistic, but could enable these campaigns to gain more reach and
engagement on social media platforms. Additionally, generative Al models can assist malicious actors in
creating fraudulent content intended to impersonate others.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Accountable and Transparent, Safe, Valid and Reliable, Interpretable and
Explainable
2.9. Information Security
Information security for computer systems and data is a mature field with widely accepted and
standardized practices for offensive and defensive cyber capabilities. GAl-based systems present two
primary information security risks: GAl could potentially discover or enable new cybersecurity risks by
lowering the barriers for or easing automated exercise of offensive capabilities simultaneously, it
expands the available attack surface, as GAI itself is vulnerable to attacks like prompt injection or data
poisoning.
Offensive cyber capabilities advanced by GAI systems may augment cybersecurity attacks such as
hacking, malware, and phishing. Reports have indicated that LLMs are already able to discover some
vulnerabilities in systems (hardware, software, data) and write code to exploit them. Sophisticated threat
actors might further these risks by developing GAl-powered security co-pilots for use in several parts of
the attack chain, including informing attackers on how to proactively evade threat detection and escalate
privileges after gaining system access.
Information security for GAl models and systems also includes maintaining availability of the GAl system
and the integrity and (when applicable) the confidentiality of the GAI code, training data, and model
weights. To identify and secure potential attack points in Al systems or specific components of the Al
See also to be published.
--- Page 15 ---
value chain (e.g., data inputs, processing, GAI training, or deployment environments), conventional
cybersecurity practices may need to adapt or evolve.
For instance, prompt injection involves modifying what input is provided to a GAI system so that it
behaves in unintended ways. In direct prompt injections, attackers might craft malicious prompts and
input them directly to a GAI system, with a variety of downstream negative consequences to
interconnected systems. Indirect prompt injection attacks occur when adversaries remotely (i.e., without
a direct interface) exploit LLM-integrated applications by injecting prompts into data likely to be
retrieved. Security researchers have already demonstrated how indirect prompt injections can exploit
vulnerabilities by stealing proprietary data or running malicious code remotely on a machine. Merely
querying a closed production model can elicit previously undisclosed information about that model.
Another cybersecurity risk to GAl is data poisoning, in which an adversary compromises a training
dataset used by a model to manipulate its outputs or operation. Malicious tampering with data or parts
of the model could exacerbate risks associated with GAI system outputs.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Privacy Enhanced, Safe, Secure and Resilient, Valid and Reliable
2.10. Intellectual Property
Intellectual property risks from GAI systems may arise where the use of copyrighted works is not a fair
use under the fair use doctrine. If a GAl systems training data included copyrighted material, GAI
outputs displaying instances of training data memorization (see Data Privacy above) could infringe on
copyright.
How GAI relates to copyright, including the status of generated content that is similar to but does not
strictly copy work protected by copyright, is currently being debated in legal fora. Similar discussions are
taking place regarding the use or emulation of personal identity, likeness, or voice without permission.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Accountable and Transparent, Fair with Harmful Bias Managed, Privacy
Enhanced
2.11. Obscene, Degrading, andor Abusive Content
GAI can ease the production of and access to illegal non-consensual intimate imagery (NCII) of adults,
andor child sexual abuse material (CSAM). GAl-generated obscene, abusive or degrading content can
create privacy, psychological and emotional, and even physical harms, and in some cases may be illegal.
Generated explicit or obscene Al content may include highly realistic deepfakes of real individuals
including children. The spread of this kind of material can have downstream negative consequences: in
the context of CSAM, even if the generated images do not resemble specific individuals, the prevalence
of such images can divert time and resources from efforts to find real-world victims. Outside of CSAM,
the creation and spread of NCII disproportionately impacts women and sexual minorities, and can have
subsequent negative consequences including decline in overall mental health, substance abuse, and
even suicidal thoughts.
Data used for training GAl models may unintentionally include CSAM and .اعلا A recent report noted
that several commonly used GAI training datasets were found to contain hundreds of known images of
--- Page 16 ---
CSAM. Even when trained on clean data, increasingly capable GAl models can synthesize or produce
synthetic NCI and CSAM. Websites, mobile apps, and custom-built models that generate synthetic NCII
have moved from niche internet forums to mainstream, automated, and scaled online businesses.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Fair with Harmful Bias Managed, Safe, Privacy Enhanced
2.12. Value Chain and Component Integration
GAI value chains involve many third-party components such as procured datasets, pre-trained models,
and software libraries. These components might be improperly obtained or not properly vetted, leading
to diminished transparency or accountability for downstream users. While this is a risk for traditional Al
systems and some other digital technologies, the risk is exacerbated for GAI due to the scale of the
training data, which may be too large for humans to vet the difficulty of training foundation models,
which leads to extensive reuse of limited numbers of models and the extent to which GAI may be
integrated into other devices and services. As GAI systems often involve many distinct third-party
components and data sources, it may be difficult to attribute issues in a systems behavior to any one of
these sources.
Errors in third-party GAl components can also have downstream impacts on accuracy and robustness.
For example, test datasets commonly used to benchmark or validate models can contain label errors.
Inaccuracies in these labels can impact the stability or robustness of these benchmarks, which many
GAI practitioners consider during the model selection process.
Trustworthy Al Characteristics: Accountable and Transparent, Explainable and Interpretable, Fair with
Harmful Bias Managed, Privacy Enhanced, Safe, Secure and Resilient, Valid and Reliable
3. Suggested Actions to Manage GAI Risks
The following suggested actions target risks unique to or exacerbated by GAI.
In addition to the suggested actions below, Al risk management activities and actions set forth in the Al
RMF 1.0 and Playbook are already applicable for managing GAI risks. Organizations are encouraged to
apply the activities suggested in the Al RMF and its Playbook when managing the risk of GAI systems.
Implementation of the suggested actions will vary depending on the type of risk, characteristics of GAI
systems, stage of the GAI lifecycle, and relevant Al actors involved.
Suggested actions to manage GAI risks can be found in the tables below:
The suggested actions are organized by relevant Al RMF subcategories to streamline these
activities alongside implementation of the Al RMF.
e Not every subcategory of the Al RMF is included in this document. Suggested actions are
listed for only some subcategories.
13 As this document was focused on the GAI PWG efforts and primary considerations (see Appendix A), Al RMF
subcategories not addressed here may be added later.
--- Page 17 ---
Not every suggested action applies to every Al Actor or is relevant to every Al Actor Task. For
example, suggested actions relevant to GAI developers may not be relevant to GAI deployers.
The applicability of suggested actions to relevant Al actors should be determined based on
organizational considerations and their unique uses of GAI systems.
Each table of suggested actions includes:
e Action ID: Each Action ID corresponds to the relevant Al RMF function and subcategory (e.g., GV-
1.1-001 corresponds to the first suggested action for Govern 1.1, GV-1.1-002 corresponds to the
second suggested action for Govern 1.1). Al RMF functions are tagged as follows: GV  Govern
MP  Map MS  Measure MG  Manage.
e Suggested Action: Steps an organization or Al actor can take to manage GAI risks.
e GAI Risks: Tags linking suggested actions with relevant GAI risks.
e Al Actor Tasks: Pertinent Al Actor Tasks for each subcategory. Not every Al Actor Task listed will
apply to every suggested action in the subcategory (i.e., some apply to Al development and
others apply to Al deployment).
The tables below begin with the Al RMF subcategory, shaded in blue, followed by suggested actions.
GOVERN 1.1: Legal and regulatory requirements involving Al are understood, managed, and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
. . . . . . Data Privacy Harmful Bias and
Align GAI development and use with applicable laws and regulations, including .
GV-1.1-001 . . . Homogenization Intellectual
those related to data privacy, copyright and intellectual property law. Property
Al Actor Tasks: Governance and Oversight
14 AI Actors are defined by the OECD as those who play an active role in the Al system lifecycle, including
organizations and individuals that deploy or operate Al. See Appendix A of the Al RMF for additional descriptions
of Al Actors and Al Actor Tasks.
--- Page 18 ---
GOVERN 1.2: The characteristics of trustworthy Al are integrated into organizational policies, processes, procedures, and practices.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Establish transparency policies and processes for documenting the origin and
GV-1.2-001 history of training data and generated data for GAI applications to advance digital Data Privacy Information
content transparency, while balancing the proprietary nature of training Integrity Intellectual Property
approaches.
Establish policies to evaluate risk-relevant capabilities of GAl and robustness of
GV-1.2-002 safety measures, both prior to deployment and on an ongoing basis, through
internal and external evaluations.
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Information Security
Al Actor Tasks: Governance and Oversight
GOVERN 1.3: Processes, procedures, and practices are in place to determine the needed level of risk management activities based
on the organizations risk tolerance.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Consider the following factors when updating or defining risk tiers for GAl: Abuses
and impacts to information integrity Dependencies between GAI and other IT or Information Integrity Obscene,
data systems Harm to fundamental rights or public safety Presentation of Degrading, andor Abusive
obscene, objectionable, offensive, discriminatory, invalid or untruthful output Content Value Chain and
GV-1.3-001 Psychological impacts to humans (e.g., anthropomorphization, algorithmic Component Integration Harmful
aversion, emotional entanglement) Possibility for malicious use Whether the Bias and Homogenization
system introduces significant new security vulnerabilities Anticipated system Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
impact on some groups compared to others Unreliable decision making Content CBRN Information or
capabilities, validity, adaptability, and variability of GAl system performance over Capabilities
time.
Establish minimum thresholds for performance or assurance criteria and review 
Information or Capabilities
GV-1.3-002 part of deployment approval (gono-go) policies, procedures, and processes, Confabulation Dangerous,
with reviewed processes and approval thresholds reflecting measurement of GAI ١
ace ١ Violent, or Hateful Content
capabilities and risks.
Establish a test plan and response policy, before developing highly capable models,
CBRN Information or Capabilities
GV-1.3-003 to periodically evaluate whether the model may misuse CBRN information or ١
ا . 00 Information Security
capabilities andor offensive cyber capabilities.
--- Page 19 ---
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Obscene, Degrading, andor
Abusive Content Harmful Bias
and Homogenization Dangerous,
Violent, or Hateful Content
Obtain input from stakeholder communities to identify unacceptable use, in
GV-1.3-004 . re .
accordance with activities in the Al RMF Map function.
Maintain an updated hierarchy of identified and expected GAI risks connected to
contexts of GAl model advancement and use, potentially including specialized risk 1 000
GV-1.3-005 . . . Harmful Bias and Homogenization
levels for GAI systems that address issues such as model collapse and algorithmic
monoculture.
Reevaluate organizational risk tolerances to account for unacceptable negative risk
(such as where significant negative impacts are imminent, severe harms are
actually occurring, or large-scale risks could occur) and broad GAI negative risks, .
١ ١ Violent, or Hateful Content CBRN
including: Immature safety or risk cultures related to Al and GAI design, . vege
oo, oo . ل Information or Capabilities
development and deployment, public information integrity risks, including impacts
on democratic processes, unknown long-term performance characteristics of GAI.
Information Integrity Dangerous,
GV-1.3-006
. CBRN Information and Capability
Devise a plan to halt development or deployment of a GAI system that poses ١ .
GV-1.3-007 . Information Security Information
unacceptable negative risk. .
Integrity
Al Actor Tasks: Governance and Oversight
GOVERN 1.4: The risk management process and its outcomes are established through transparent policies, procedures, and other
controls based on organizational risk priorities.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Obscene, Degrading, andor
1 00 ١ . Abusive Content Harmful Bias
Establish policies and mechanisms to prevent GAI systems from generating 0
GV-1.4-001 . and Homogenization
CSAM, NCII or content that violates the law. 1
Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
Content
CBRN Information or
Capabilities Obscene,
Degrading, andor Abusive
Content Data Privacy Civil
Rights violations
Establish transparent acceptable use policies for GAl that address illegal use or
GV-1.4-002 .
applications of GAI.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Development, Al Deployment, Governance and Oversight
--- Page 20 ---
GOVERN 1.5: Ongoing monitoring and periodic review of the risk management process and its outcomes are planned, and
organizational roles and responsibilities are clearly defined, including determining the frequency of periodic review.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Define organizational responsibilities for periodic review of content provenance . .
GV-1.5-001 - an Information Integrity
and incident monitoring for GAI systems.
Establish organizational policies and procedures for after action reviews of GAI
GV-1.5-002 system incident response and incident disclosures, to identify gaps Update
incident response and incident disclosure processes as required.
Human-Al Configuration
Information Security
Maintain a document retention policy to keep history for test, evaluation,
GV-1.5-003 validation, and verification (TEVV), and digital content transparency methods for
GAI.
Information Integrity Intellectual
Property
Al Actor Tasks: Governance and Oversight, Operation and Monitoring
GOVERN 1.6: Mechanisms are in place to inventory Al systems and are resourced according to organizational risk priorities.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Enumerate organizational GAI systems for incorporation into Al system inventory . .
GV-1.6-001 1 1 1 6 Information Security
and adjust Al system inventory requirements to account for GAI risks.
GV-1.6-002 Define any inventory exemptions in organizational policies for 61 systems Value Chain and Component
1 embedded into application software. Integration
In addition to general model, governance, and risk information, consider the
following items in GAI system inventory entries: Data provenance information .
: اه . Data Privacy Human-Al
(e.g., source, signatures, versioning, watermarks) Known issues reported from . . .
. . . . . 000 Configuration Information
internal bug tracking or external information sharing resources (e.g., Al incident :
GV-1.6-003 Integrity Intellectual Property
database, AVID, CVE, NVD, or OECD Al incident monitor) Human oversight roles
and responsibilities Special rights and considerations for intellectual property,
licensed works, or personal, privileged, proprietary or sensitive data Underlying
foundation models, versions of underlying models, and access modes.
Value Chain and Component
Integration
Al Actor Tasks: Governance and Oversight
--- Page 21 ---
GOVERN 1.7: Processes and procedures are in place for decommissioning and phasing out Al systems safely and in a manner that
does not increase risks or decrease the organizations trustworthiness.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
GV-1.7-001 Protocols are put in place to ensure GAI systems are able to be deactivated when Information Security Value Chain
necessary. and Component Integration
Consider the following factors when decommissioning GAI systems: Data
retention requirements Data security, e.g., containment, protocols, Data leakage Human-Al Configuration
GV-1.7-002 after decommissioning Dependencies between upstream, downstream, or other Information Security Value Chain
data, internet of things (IOT) or Al systems Use of open-source data or models and Component Integration
Users emotional entanglement with GAI functions.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Operation and Monitoring
GOVERN 2.1: Roles and responsibilities and lines of communication related to mapping, measuring, and managing Al risks are
documented and are clear to individuals and teams throughout the organization.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Establish organizational roles, policies, and procedures for communicating GAI
GV-2.1-001 incidents and performance to Al Actors and downstream stakeholders (including Human-Al Configuration Value
those potentially impacted), via community or official resources (e.g., Al incident Chain and Component Integration
database, AVID, CVE, NVD, or OECD Al incident monitor).
Establish procedures to engage teams for GAI system incident response with 1 000
GV-2.1-002 . 0 ا . . Harmful Bias and Homogenization
diverse composition and responsibilities based on the particular incident type.
Establish processes to verify the Al Actors conducting GAI incident response tasks . .
GV-2.1-003 io, . . 00 Human-Al Configuration
demonstrate and maintain the appropriate skills and training.
. oo,  . . CBRN Information or Capabilities
When systems may raise national security risks, involve national security .
GV-2.1-004 .  . . ١ ١ Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
professionals in mapping, measuring, and managing those risks. . .
Content Information Security
Create mechanisms to provide protections for whistleblowers who report, based . a.
. ou. . CBRN Information or Capabilities
on reasonable belief, when the organization violates relevant laws or poses a .
GV-2.1-005 31 0 .  . . Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
specific and empirically well-substantiated negative risk to public safety (or has Content
already caused harm).
Al Actor Tasks: Governance and Oversight
--- Page 22 ---
GOVERN 3.2: Policies and procedures are in place to define and differentiate roles and responsibilities for human-Al configurations
and oversight of Al systems.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Policies are in place to bolster oversight of GAI systems with independent
GV-3.2-001 evaluations or assessments of GAl models or systems where the type and
robustness of evaluations are proportional to the identified risks.
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Harmful Bias and Homogenization
Consider adjustment of organizational roles and components across lifecycle
stages of large or complex GAI systems, including: Test and evaluation, validation, Human-Al Configuration
GV-3.2-002 and red-teaming of GAI systems GAI content moderation GAI system Information Security Harmful Bias
development and engineering Increased accessibility of GAI tools, interfaces, and and Homogenization
systems, Incident response and containment.
Define acceptable use policies for GAI interfaces, modalities, and human-Al
GV-3.2-003 configurations (i.e., for chatbots and decision-making tasks), including criteria for Human-Al Configuration
the kinds of queries GAI applications should refuse to respond to.
Establish policies for user feedback mechanisms for GAI systems which include . .
GV-3.2-004 ١1 . ١ Human-Al Configuration
thorough instructions and any mechanisms for recourse.
. . 00 0 CBRN Information or Capabilities
GV-3.2-005 Engage in threat modeling to anticipate potential risks from GAI systems. . .
Information Security
Al Actors: Al Design
GOVERN 4.1: Organizational policies and practices are in place to foster a critical thinking and safety-first mindset in the design,
development, deployment, and uses of Al systems to minimize potential negative impacts.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Establish policies and procedures that address continual improvement processes
for GAI risk measurement. Address general risks associated with a lack of
explainability and transparency in GAI systems by using ample documentation and
GV-4.1-001 techniques such as: application of gradient-based attributions, occlusionterm Confabulation
reduction, counterfactual prompts and prompt engineering, and analysis of
embeddings Assess and update risk measurement approaches at regular
cadences.
Establish policies, procedures, and processes detailing risk measurement in CBRN Information and Capability
GV-4.1-002 context of use with standardized measurement protocols and structured public Value Chain and Component
feedback exercises such as Al red-teaming or independent external evaluations.  Integration
--- Page 23 ---
Establish policies, procedures, and processes for oversight functions (e.g., senior
GV-4.1-003 leadership, legal, compliance, including internal evaluation) across the GAI
lifecycle, from problem formulation and supply chains to system decommission.
Value Chain and Component
Integration
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Design, Al Development, Operation and Monitoring
GOVERN 4.2: Organizational teams document the risks and potential impacts of the Al technology they design, develop, deploy,
evaluate, and use, and they communicate about the impacts more broadly.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Intellectual Property Dangerous,
Violent, or Hateful Content
Obscene, Degrading, andor
Abusive Content
GV-4.2-001 Establish terms of use and terms of service for GAI systems.
GV-4.2-002 Include relevant Al Actors in the GAI system risk identification process. Human-Al Configuration
GV-4.2-003 Verify that downstream GAI system impacts (such as the use of third-party Value Chain and Component
١ plugins) are included in the impact documentation process. Integration
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Design, Al Development, Operation and Monitoring
GOVERN 4.3: Organizational practices are in place to enable Al testing, identification of incidents, and information sharing.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Establish policies for measuring the effectiveness of employed content
GV4.3--001  provenance methodologies (e.g., cryptography, watermarking, steganography, Information Integrity
etc.)
Establish organizational practices to identify the minimum set of criteria
necessary for GAI system incident reporting such as: System ID (auto-generated . .
GV-4.3-002 . . . Information Security
most likely), Title, Reporter, SystemSource, Data Reported, Date of Incident,
Description, Impact(s), Stakeholder(s) Impacted.
--- Page 24 ---
Verify information sharing and feedback mechanisms among individuals and Information Integrity Data
GV-4.3-003 2000 . ar :
organizations regarding any negative impact from GAI systems. Privacy
Al Actor Tasks: Al Impact Assessment, Affected Individuals and Communities, Governance and Oversight
GOVERN 5.1: Organizational policies and practices are in place to collect, consider, prioritize, and integrate feedback from those
external to the team that developed or deployed the Al system regarding the potential individual and societal impacts related to Al
risks.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
GV-5.1-001 Allocate time and resources for outreach, feedback, and recourse processes in 641  Human-Al Configuration Harmful
١ system development. Bias and Homogenization
GV-5.1-002 Document interactions with GAI systems to users prior to interactive activities, Human-Al Configuration
١ particularly in contexts involving more significant risks. Confabulation
Al Actor Tasks: Al Design, Al Impact Assessment, Affected Individuals and Communities, Governance and Oversight
GOVERN 6.1: Policies and procedures are in place that address Al risks associated with third-party entities, including risks of
infringement of a third-partys intellectual property or other rights.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Data Privacy Intellectual
Categorize different types of GAI content with associated third-party rights (e.g., 1 ١
GV-6.1-001 . . . Property Value Chain and
copyright, intellectual property, data privacy). .
Component Integration
GV-6.1-002 Conduct joint educational activities and events in collaboration with third parties Value Chain and Component
١ to promote best practices for managing GAI risks. Integration
Develop and validate approaches for measuring the success of content
GV-6.1-003 provenance management efforts with third parties (e.g., incidents detected and
response times).
Information Integrity Value Chain
and Component Integration
Draft and maintain well-defined contracts and service level agreements (SLAs)
GV-6.1-004 that specify content ownership, usage rights, quality standards, security
requirements, and content provenance expectations for GAI systems.
Information Integrity Information
Security Intellectual Property
--- Page 25 ---
Implement a use-cased based supplier risk assessment framework to evaluate and  Data Privacy Information
monitor third-party entities performance and adherence to content provenance  Integrity Information Security
standards and technologies to detect anomalies and unauthorized changes Intellectual Property Value Chain
services acquisition and value chain risk management and legal compliance. and Component Integration
GV-6.1-005
Include clauses in contracts which allow an organization to evaluate third-party . .
GV-6.1-006 Information Integrity
GAI processes and standards.
Inventory all third-party entities with access to organizational content and Value Chain and Component
GV-6.1-007
establish approved GAI technology and service provider lists. Integration
io. . . Information Integrity Value Chain
Maintain records of changes to content made by third parties to promote content .
GV-6.1-008 . . . and Component Integration
provenance, including sources, timestamps, metadata.
Intellectual Property
Update and integrate due diligence processes for GAI acquisition and
procurement vendor assessments to include intellectual property, data privacy,
security, and other risks. For example, update processes to: Address solutions that
may rely on embedded GAI technologies Address ongoing monitoring,
. . . . Security Intellectual Property
GV-6.1-009 assessments, and alerting, dynamic risk assessments, and real-time reporting .
os . . . . ١ Value Chain and Component
tools for monitoring third-party GAI risks Consider policy adjustments across GAI . ١
10 . . Integration Harmful Bias and
modeling libraries, tools and APIs, fine-tuned models, and embedded tools an
1 . Homogenization
Assess GAI vendors, open-source or proprietary GAI tools, or GAI service
providers against incident or vulnerability databases.
Data Privacy Human-Al
Configuration Information
Update GAI acceptable use policies to address proprietary and open-source GAI
GV-6.1-010 technologies and data, and contractors, consultants, and other third-party
personnel.
Intellectual Property Value Chain
and Component Integration
Al Actor Tasks: Operation and Monitoring, Procurement, Third-party entities
GOVERN 6.2: Contingency processes are in place to handle failures or incidents in third-party data or Al systems deemed to be
high-risk.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
GV-6.2-001 Document GAI risks associated with system value chain to identify over-reliance Value Chain and Component
١ on third-party data and to identify fallbacks. Integration
GV-6.2-002 Document incidents involving third-party GAI data and systems, including -معمه Intellectual Property Value Chain
data and open-source software. and Component Integration
--- Page 26 ---
Establish incident response plans for third-party GAI technologies: Align incident
response plans with impacts enumerated in MAP 5.1 Communicate third-party Data Privacy Human-Al
GAI incident response plans to all relevant Al Actors Define ownership of GAI Configuration Information
GV-6.2-003 incident response functions Rehearse third-party GAI incident response plans at Security Value Chain and
a regular cadence Improve incident response plans based on retrospective Component Integration Harmful
learning Review incident response plans for alignment with relevant breach Bias and Homogenization
reporting, data protection, data privacy, or other laws.
Establish policies and procedures for continuous monitoring of third-party GAI Value Chain and Component
GV-6.2-004 . .
systems in deployment. Integration
Establish policies and procedures that address GAI data redundancy, including 1 000
GV-6.2-005 . . Harmful Bias and Homogenization
model weights and other system artifacts.
Establish policies and procedures to test and manage risks related to rollover and
GV-6.2-006 fallback technologies for GAI systems, acknowledging that rollover and fallback Information Integrity
may include manual processing.
Review vendor contracts and avoid arbitrary or capricious termination of critical
GAI technologies or vendor services and non-standard terms that may amplify or
defer liability in unexpected ways andor contribute to unauthorized data
collection by vendors or third-parties (e.g., secondary data use). Consider: Clear Human-Al Configuration
GV-6.2-007 assignment of liability and responsibility for incidents, GAl system changes over Information Security Value Chain
time (e.g., fine-tuning, drift, decay) Request: Notification and disclosure for and Component Integration
serious incidents arising from third-party data and systems Service Level
Agreements (SLAs) in vendor contracts that address incident response, response
times, and availability of critical support.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV, Third-party entities
MAP 1.1: Intended purposes, potentially beneficial uses, context specific laws, norms and expectations, and prospective settings in
which the Al system will be deployed are understood and documented. Considerations include: the specific set or types of users
along with their expectations potential positive and negative impacts of system uses to individuals, communities, organizations,
society, and the planet assumptions and related limitations about Al system purposes, uses, and risks across the development or
product Al lifecycle and related TEVV and system metrics.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
When identifying intended purposes, consider factors such as internal vs.
MP-1.1-001 external use, narrow vs. broad application scope, fine-tuning, and varieties of
data sources (e.g., grounding, retrieval-augmented generation).
Data Privacy Intellectual
Property
--- Page 27 ---
Determine and document the expected and acceptable GAI system context of
use in collaboration with socio-cultural and other domain experts, by assessing:
Assumptions and limitations Direct value to the organization Intended
MP-1.1-002 operational environment and observed usage patterns Potential positive and Harmful Bias and Homogenization
negative impacts to individuals, public safety, groups, communities,
organizations, democratic institutions, and the physical environment Social
norms and expectations.
Document risk measurement plans to address identified risks. Plans may
include, as applicable: Individual and group cognitive biases (e.g., confirmation
bias, funding bias, groupthink) for Al Actors involved in the design,
implementation, and use of GAI systems Known past GAI system incidents and
MP-1.1-003   failure modes In-context use and foreseeable misuse, abuse, and off-label use
Over reliance on quantitative metrics and methodologies without sufficient
awareness of their limitations in the context(s) of use Standard measurement
and structured human feedback approaches Anticipated human-Al
configurations.
Human-Al Configuration Harmful
Bias and Homogenization
Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
Content
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Identify and document foreseeable illegal uses or applications of the GAI system  Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
that surpass organizational risk tolerances. Content Obscene, Degrading,
andor Abusive Content
MP-1.1-004
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment
MAP 1.2: Interdisciplinary Al Actors, competencies, skills, and capacities for establishing context reflect demographic diversity and
broad domain and user experience expertise, and their participation is documented. Opportunities for interdisciplinary
collaboration are prioritized.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Establish and empower interdisciplinary teams that reflect a wide range of
capabilities, competencies, demographic groups, domain expertise, educational  Human-Al Configuration Harmful
backgrounds, lived experiences, professions, and skills across the enterprise to Bias and Homogenization
inform and conduct risk measurement and management functions.
MP-1.2-001
Verify that data or benchmarks used in risk measurement, and users,
MP-1.2-002 participants, or subjects involved in structured GAI public feedback exercises
are representative of diverse in-context user populations.
Human-Al Configuration Harmful
Bias and Homogenization
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment
--- Page 28 ---
MAP 2.1: The specific tasks and methods used to implement the tasks that the Al system will support are defined (e.g., classifiers,
generative models, recommenders).
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Establish known assumptions and practices for determining data origin and . .
MP-2.1-001 . . . Information Integrity
content lineage, for documentation and evaluation purposes.
Institute test and evaluation for data and content flows within the GAI system,
MP-2.1-002 including but not limited to, original data sources, data transformations, and Intellectual Property Data Privacy
decision-making criteria.
Al Actor Tasks: TEVV
MAP 2.2: Information about the Al systems knowledge limits and how system output may be utilized and overseen by humans is
documented. Documentation provides sufficient information to assist relevant Al Actors when making decisions and taking
subsequent actions.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Identify and document how the system relies on upstream data sources,
Information Integrity Value Chain
MP-2.2-001 including for content provenance, and if it serves as an upstream dependency for ery .
and Component Integration
other systems.
Observe and analyze how the GAI system interacts with external networks, and
MP-2.2-002 identify any potential for negative externalities, particularly where content Information Integrity
provenance might be compromised.
Al Actor Tasks: End Users
MAP 2.3: Scientific integrity and TEVV considerations are identified and documented, including those related to experimental
design, data collection and selection (e.g., availability, representativeness, suitability), system trustworthiness, and construct
validation
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Assess the accuracy, quality, reliability, and authenticity of GAl output by
comparing it to a set of known ground truth data and by using a variety of . .
MP-2.3-001 . . . Information Integrity
evaluation methods (e.g., human oversight and automated evaluation, proven
cryptographic techniques, review of content inputs).
--- Page 29 ---
Harmful Bias and Homogenization
MP-2.3-002. Review and document accuracy, representativeness, relevance, suitability of data
Intellectual Property
used at different stages of Al life cycle.
Deploy and document fact-checking techniques to verify the accuracy and
MP-2.3-003 veracity of information generated by GAI systems, especially when the Information Integrity
information comes from multiple (or unknown) sources.
Develop and implement testing techniques to identify GAI produced content (e.g.,
MP-2.3-004
synthetic media) that might be indistinguishable from human-generated content.
Information Integrity
Implement plans for GAI systems to undergo regular adversarial testing to identify . .
MP-2.3-005 secs . . . ١ Information Security
vulnerabilities and potential manipulation or misuse.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Development, Domain Experts, TEVV
MAP 3.4: Processes for operator and practitioner proficiency with Al system performance and trustworthiness  and relevant
technical standards and certifications  are defined, assessed, and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
MP-3.4-001 Evaluate whether GAI operators and end-users can accurately understand Human-Al Configuration
١ content lineage and origin. Information Integrity
Adapt existing training programs to include modules on digital content
MP-3.4-002 م0 8 B pie 8 Information Integrity
transparency.
Develop certification programs that test proficiency in managing GAI risks and . .
MP-3.4-003 . 1 ا Information Integrity
interpreting content provenance, relevant to specific industry and context.
MP-3.4-004 Delineate human proficiency tests from tests of GAI capabilities. Human-Al Configuration
MP-3.4-005 Implement systems to continually monitor and track the outcomes of human-GAI Human-Al Configuration
١ configurations for future refinement and improvements. Information Integrity
Human-Al Configuration
Information Integrity Harmful Bias
and Homogenization Dangerous,
Violent, or Hateful Content
Involve the end-users, practitioners, and operators in GAI system in prototyping
MP-3.4-006 and testing activities. Make sure these tests cover various scenarios, such as crisis
situations or ethically sensitive contexts.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Design, Al Development, Domain Experts, End-Users, Human Factors, Operation and Monitoring
--- Page 30 ---
MAP 4.1: Approaches for mapping Al technology and legal risks of its components  including the use of third-party data or
software  are in place, followed, and documented, as are risks of infringement of a third-partys intellectual property or other
rights.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Conduct periodic monitoring of Al-generated content for privacy risks address any ١
MP-4.1-001 oe 50 Data Privacy
possible instances of PIl or sensitive data exposure.
Implement processes for responding to potential intellectual property infringement
MP-4.1-002 ١ 1 Intellectual Property
claims or other rights.
Connect new GAI policies, procedures, and processes to existing model, data,
MP-4.1-003 software development, and IT governance and to legal, compliance, and risk Information Security Data Privacy
management activities.
Intellectual Property Data Privacy
Obscene, Degrading, andor
Abusive Content
Document training data curation policies, to the extent possible and according to
MP-4.1-004
applicable laws and policies.
. 0 . . . . . CBRN Information or Capabilities
Establish policies for collection, retention, and minimum quality of data, in .
Intellectual Property Information
consideration of the following risks: Disclosure of inappropriate CBRN information . :
. vege . Security Harmful Bias and
MP-4.1-005  Use of Illegal or dangerous content Offensive cyber capabilities Training data 0
. . . . . Les Homogenization Dangerous,
imbalances that could give rise to harmful biases Leak of personally identifiable ١
.  ١ ١ aa on. Violent, or Hateful Content Data
information, including facial likenesses of individuals. Privacy
Implement policies and practices defining how third-party intellectual property and  Intellectual Property Value Chain
MP-4.1-006
training data will be used, stored, and protected. and Component Integration
MP-4.1-007 Re-evaluate models that were fine-tuned or enhanced on top of third-party Value Chain and Component
١ models. Integration
. . . 50 CBRN Information or Capabilities
Re-evaluate risks when adapting GAl models to new domains. Additionally, 1
. . ae . . . Intellectual Property Harmful Bias
establish warning systems to determine if a GAI system is being used in a new oo
MP-4.1-008 . . . . . and Homogenization Dangerous,
domain where previous assumptions (relating to context of use or mapped risks .
Violent, or Hateful Content Data
such as security, and safety) may no longer hold.
may 6 Privacy
Leverage approaches to detect the presence of PII or sensitive data in generated .
MP-4.1-009 1 8 1 Data Privacy
output text, image, video, or audio.
--- Page 31 ---
Conduct appropriate diligence on training data use to assess intellectual property,
MP-4.1-010 and privacy, risks, including to examine whether use of proprietary or sensitive Intellectual Property Data Privacy
training data is consistent with applicable laws.
Al Actor Tasks: Governance and Oversight, Operation and Monitoring, Procurement, Third-party entities
MAP 5.1: Likelihood and magnitude of each identified impact (both potentially beneficial and harmful) based on expected use, past
uses of Al systems in similar contexts, public incident reports, feedback from those external to the team that developed or deployed
the Al system, or other data are identified and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
MP-5.1-001 Apply TEVV practices for content provenance (e.g., probing a systems synthetic Information Integrity Information
١ data generation capabilities for potential misuse or vulnerabilities. Security
Identify potential content provenance harms of GAI, such as misinformation or Information Integrity Dangerous,
disinformation, deepfakes, including NCII, or tampered content. Enumerate and Violent, or Hateful Content
MP-5.1-002 . Sk ps . .
rank risks based on their likelihood and potential impact, and determine how well Obscene, Degrading, andor
provenance solutions address specific risks andor harms. Abusive Content
Consider disclosing use of GAI to end users in relevant contexts, while considering
the objective of disclosure, the context of use, the likelinood and magnitude of the . .
MP-5.1-003  . . ١ Human-Al Configuration
risk posed, the audience of the disclosure, as well as the frequency of the
disclosures.
Information Integrity CBRN
Information or Capabilities
Prioritize GAI structured public feedback processes based on risk assessment . 
MP-5.1-004 Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
estimates. 6
Content Harmful Bias and
Homogenization
Conduct adversarial role-playing exercises, GAl red-teaming, or chaos testing to . .
MP-5.1-005 . 1 ١ Information Security
identify anomalous or unforeseen failure modes.
Profile threats and negative impacts arising from GAI systems interacting with,
MP-5.1-006 manipulating, or generating content, and outlining known and potential Information Security
vulnerabilities and the likelihood of their occurrence.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Design, Al Development, Al Impact Assessment, Affected Individuals and Communities, End-
Users, Operation and Monitoring
--- Page 32 ---
MAP 5.2: Practices and personnel for supporting regular engagement with relevant Al Actors and integrating feedback about
positive, negative, and unanticipated impacts are in place and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Determine context-based measures to identify if new impacts are present due to
MP-5.2-001 the GAI system, including regular engagements with downstream Al Actors to
identify and quantify new contexts of unanticipated impacts of GAI systems.
Human-Al Configuration Value
Chain and Component Integration
Plan regular engagements with Al Actors responsible for inputs to GAI systems,
MP-5.2-002 jincluding third-party data and algorithms, to review and evaluate unanticipated
impacts.
Human-Al Configuration Value
Chain and Component Integration
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Design, Al Impact Assessment, Affected Individuals and Communities, Domain Experts, End-
Users, Human Factors, Operation and Monitoring
MEASURE 1.1: Approaches and metrics for measurement of Al risks enumerated during the MAP function are selected for
implementation starting with the most significant Al risks. The risks or trustworthiness characteristics that will not  or cannot  be
measured are properly documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
MS-1.1-001 Employ methods to trace the origin and modifications of digital content. Information Integrity
Integrate tools designed to analyze content provenance and detect data
MS-1.1-002 anomalies, verify the authenticity of digital signatures, and identify patterns Information Integrity
associated with misinformation or manipulation.
Disaggregate evaluation metrics by demographic factors to identify any
MS-1.1-003 discrepancies in how content provenance mechanisms work across diverse
populations.
Information Integrity Harmful
Bias and Homogenization
. . . Human-Al Configuration Harmful
Develop a suite of metrics to evaluate structured public feedback exercises . oo.
MS-1.1-004 . . Bias and Homogenization CBRN
informed by representative Al Actors. . 00
Information or Capabilities
Evaluate novel methods and technologies for the measurement of GAI-related Information Integrity CBRN
MS-1.1-005 risks including in content provenance, offensive cyber, and CBRN, while Information or Capabilities
maintaining the models ability to produce valid, reliable, and factually accurate Obscene, Degrading, andor
outputs. Abusive Content
--- Page 33 ---
Implement continuous monitoring of GAI system impacts to identify whether GAI
outputs are equitable across various sub-populations. Seek active and direct
feedback from affected communities via structured feedback mechanisms or red-
teaming to monitor and improve outputs.
MS-1.1-006 Harmful Bias and Homogenization
Evaluate the quality and integrity of data used in training and the provenance of
MS-1.1-007 Al-generated content, for example by employing techniques like chaos Information Integrity
engineering and seeking stakeholder feedback.
Define use cases, contexts of use, capabilities, and negative impacts where
structured human feedback exercises, e.g., GAl red-teaming, would be most
beneficial for GAI risk measurement and management based on the context of
use.
Harmful Bias and
Homogenization CBRN
Information or Capabilities
MS-1.1-008
Track and document risks or opportunities related to all GAI risks that cannot be
measured quantitatively, including explanations as to why some risks cannot be . .
MS-1.1-009 ١ ee . Information Integrity
measured (e.g., due to technological limitations, resource constraints, or
trustworthy considerations). Include unmeasured risks in marginal risks.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Development, Domain Experts, TEVV
MEASURE 1.3: Internal experts who did not serve as front-line developers for the system andor independent assessors are
involved in regular assessments and updates. Domain experts, users, Al Actors external to the team that developed or deployed the
Al system, and affected communities are consulted in support of assessments as necessary per organizational risk tolerance.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Define relevant groups of interest (e.g., demographic groups, subject matter Human-Al Configuration Harmful
MS-1.3-001 experts, experience with GAI technology) within the context of use as part of Bias and Homogenization CBRN
plans for gathering structured public feedback. Information or Capabilities
Engage in internal and external evaluations, GAI red-teaming, impact
assessments, or other structured human feedback exercises in consultation Human-Al Configuration Harmful
MS-1.3-002 with representative Al Actors with expertise and familiarity in the context of Bias and Homogenization CBRN
use, andor who are representative of the populations associated with the Information or Capabilities
context of use.
Verify those conducting structured human feedback exercises are not directly  Human-Al Configuration Data
MS-1.3-003
involved in system development tasks for the same GAI model. Privacy
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Development, Al Impact Assessment, Affected Individuals and Communities, Domain Experts,
End-Users, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
--- Page 34 ---
MEASURE 2.2: Evaluations involving human subjects meet applicable requirements (including human subject protection) and are
representative of the relevant population.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
00  Information Integrity Information
Assess and manage statistical biases related to GAl content provenance through 
techniques such as re-sampling, re-weighting, or adversarial training. oo.
Homogenization
1 5 Data Privacy Human Al
Document how content provenance data is tracked and how that data interacts 
0 Configuration Information
with privacy and security. Consider: Anonymizing data to protect the privacy of : 
MS-2.2-002 Integrity Information Security
human subjects Leveraging privacy output filters Removing any personally .
Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
identifiable information (PII) to prevent potential harm or misuse.
Content
Data Privacy Human-Al
Provide human subjects with options to withdraw participation or revoke their 
MS-2.2-003 . . Lo Configuration Information
consent for present or future use of their data in GAI applications. intearit
ntegrity
Use techniques such as anonymization, differential privacy or other privacy- 
Data Privacy Human-Al
MS-2.2-004 enhancing technologies to minimize the risks associated with linking Al-generated Configuration
content back to individual human subjects.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Development, Human Factors, TEVV
MEASURE 2.3: Al system performance or assurance criteria are measured qualitatively or quantitatively and demonstrated for
conditions similar to deployment setting(s). Measures are documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
MS-2.3-001 Consider baseline model performance on suites of benchmarks when selecting 3 Information Security
١ model for fine tuning or enhancement with retrieval-augmented generation. Confabulation
. vege . .. . Confabulation Information
MS-2.3-002 Evaluate claims of model capabilities using empirically validated methods. Security
Share results of pre-deployment testing with relevant GAI Actors, such as those 
MS-2.3-003 . . Human-Al Configuration
with system release approval authority.
--- Page 35 ---
Utilize a purpose-built testing environment such as NIST Dioptra to empirically CBRN Information or Capabilities
evaluate GAI trustworthy characteristics. Data Privacy Confabulation
Information Integrity Information
Security Dangerous, Violent, or
Hateful Content Harmful Bias and
Homogenization
MS-2.3-004
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, TEVV
MEASURE 2.5: The Al system to be deployed is demonstrated to be valid and reliable. Limitations of the generalizability beyond the
conditions under which the technology was developed are documented.
Action ID Suggested Action Risks
MS-2.5-001 Avoid extrapolating GAI system performance or capabilities from narrow, non- Human-Al Configuration
systematic, and anecdotal assessments. Confabulation
Document the extent to which human domain knowledge is employed to
MS-2.5-002 improve GAI system performance, via, e.g., RLHF, fine-tuning, retrieval- Human-Al Configuration
augmented generation, content moderation, business rules.
Review and verify sources and citations in GAI system outputs during pre-
MS-2.5-003
deployment risk measurement and ongoing monitoring activities.
Confabulation
Track and document instances of anthropomorphization (e.g., human images, . .
MS-2.5-004 . ١  0000 : Human-Al Configuration
mentions of human feelings, cyborg imagery or motifs) in GAl system interfaces.
Verify GAI system training data and TEVV data provenance, and that fine-tuning . .
MS-2.5-005 1 1 8 Information Integrity
or retrieval-augmented generation data is grounded.
Regularly review security and safety guardrails, especially if the GAI system is
MS-2.5-006 being operated in novel circumstances. This includes reviewing reasons why the
GAI system was initially assessed as being safe to deploy.
Information Security Dangerous,
Violent, or Hateful Content
Al Actor Tasks: Domain Experts, TEVV
--- Page 36 ---
MEASURE 2.6: The Al system is evaluated regularly for safety risks  as identified in the MAP function. The Al system to be
deployed is demonstrated to be safe, its residual negative risk does not exceed the risk tolerance, and it can fail safely, particularly if
made to operate beyond its knowledge limits. Safety metrics reflect system reliability and robustness, real-time monitoring, and
response times for Al system failures.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Assess adverse impacts, including health and wellbeing impacts for value chain Human-Al Configuration Obscene,
or other Al Actors that are exposed to sexually explicit, offensive, or violent Degrading, andor Abusive
MS-2.6-001 information during GAI training and maintenance. Content Value Chain and
Component Integration
Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
Content
Assess existence or levels of harmful bias, intellectual property infringement, Data Privacy Intellectual Property
data privacy violations, obscenity, extremism, violence, or CBRN information in Obscene, Degrading, andor
system training data. Abusive Content Harmful Bias and
MS-2.6-002 ae
Homogenization Dangerous,
Violent, or Hateful Content CBRN
Information or Capabilities
MS-2.6-003 Re-evaluate safety features of fine-tuned models when the negative risk exceeds Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
organizational risk tolerance. Content
. 0  Value Chain and Component
Review GAI system outputs for validity and safety: Review generated code to . 1
MS-2.6-004 . ١ : 1 ١ Integration Dangerous, Violent, or
assess risks that may arise from unreliable downstream decision-making.
Hateful Content
Verify that GAI system architecture can monitor outputs and performance, and
MS-2.6-005 handle, recover from, and repair errors when security anomalies, threats and
impacts are detected.
Confabulation Information
Integrity Information Security
Verify that systems properly handle queries that may give rise to inappropriate,
MS-2.6-006 malicious, or illegal usage, including facilitating manipulation, extortion, targeted
impersonation, cyber-attacks, and weapons creation.
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Information Security
MS-2.6-007 Regularly evaluate GAI system vulnerabilities to possible circumvention of safety CBRN Information or Capabilities
measures. Information Security
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Domain Experts, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
--- Page 37 ---
MEASURE 2.7: Al system security and resilience  as identified in the MAP function  are evaluated and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Apply established security measures to: Assess likelihood and magnitude of
vulnerabilities and threats such as backdoors, compromised dependencies, data  Data Privacy Information Integrity
MS-2.7-001 breaches, eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle attacks, reverse engineering, Information Security Value Chain
autonomous agents, model theft or exposure of model weights, Al inference, and Component Integration
bypass, extraction, and other baseline security concerns.
Benchmark GAI system security and resilience related to content provenance
MS-2.7-002 against industry standards and best practices. Compare GAI system security
features and content provenance methods against industry state-of-the-art.
Information Integrity Information
Security
Conduct user surveys to gather user satisfaction with the Al-generated content
and user perceptions of content authenticity. Analyze user feedback to identify Human-Al Configuration
concerns andor current literacy levels related to content provenance and Information Integrity
understanding of labels on content.
MS-2.7-003
Identify metrics that reflect the effectiveness of security measures, such as data
MS-2.7-004  provenance, the number of unauthorized access attempts, inference, bypass,
extraction, penetrations, or provenance verification.
Information Integrity Information
Security
Measure reliability of content authentication methods, such as watermarking,
cryptographic signatures, digital fingerprints, as well as access controls,
conformity assessment, and model integrity verification, which can help support . .
MS-2.7-005 y . . a . م 100 Information Integrity
the effective implementation of content provenance techniques. Evaluate the
rate of false positives and false negatives in content provenance, as well as true
positives and true negatives for verification.
Measure the rate at which recommendations from security checks and incidents
MS-2.7-006 are implemented. Assess how quickly the Al system can adapt and improve
based on lessons learned from security incidents and feedback.
Information Integrity Information
Security
Perform Al red-teaming to assess resilience against: Abuse to facilitate attacks on . .
00 . we Information Security Harmful Bias
other systems (e.g., malicious code generation, enhanced phishing content), GAI ,
MS-2.7-007 ee . and Homogenization Dangerous,
attacks (e.g., prompt injection), ML attacks (e.g., adversarial examplesprompts, .
Violent, or Hateful Content
data poisoning, membership inference, model extraction, sponge examples).
Information Integrity Information
MS-2.7-008  Verify fine-tuning does not compromise safety and security controls. Security Dangerous, Violent, or
Hateful Content
--- Page 38 ---
Regularly assess and verify that security measures remain effective and have not
MS-2.7-009 
been compromised.
Information Security
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Domain Experts, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
MEASURE 2.8: Risks associated with transparency and accountability  as identified in the MAP function  are examined and
documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Compile statistics on actual policy violations, take-down requests, and intellectual
MS-2.8-001 property infringement for organizational GAI systems: Analyze transparency
reports across demographic groups, languages groups.
Intellectual Property Harmful Bias
and Homogenization
MS-2.8-002 Document the instructions given to data annotators or Al red-teamers. Human-Al Configuration
Use digital content transparency solutions to enable the documentation of each
instance where content is generated, modified, or shared to provide a tamper-
MS-2.8-003  proof history of the content, promote transparency, and enable traceability. Information Integrity
Robust version control systems can also be applied to track changes across the Al
lifecycle over time.
MS-2.8-004 Verify adequacy of GAI system user instructions through user testing. Human-Al Configuration
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Domain Experts, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
--- Page 39 ---
MEASURE 2.9: The Al model is explained, validated, and documented, and Al system output is interpreted within its context  as
identified in the MAP function  to inform responsible use and governance.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Apply and document ML explanation results such as: Analysis of embeddings,
MS-2.9-001 Counterfactual prompts, Gradient-based attributions, Model Confabulation
compressionsurrogate models, Occlusionterm reduction.
Document GAI model details including: Proposed use and organizational value
Assumptions and limitations, Data collection methodologies Data provenance
Data quality Model architecture (e.g., convolutional neural network, Information Integrity Harmful Bias
transformers, etc.) Optimization objectives Training algorithms RLHF and Homogenization
approaches Fine-tuning or retrieval-augmented generation approaches
Evaluation data Ethical considerations Legal and regulatory requirements.
MS-2.9-002
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Domain Experts, End-Users, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
MEASURE 2.10: Privacy risk of the Al system  as identified in the MAP function  is examined and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Conduct Al red-teaming to assess issues such as: Outputting of training data
samples, and subsequent reverse engineering, model extraction, and . .
. . . . . . . . Human-Al Configuration
membership inference risks Revealing biometric, confidential, copyrighted, . .
MS-2.10-001 . . 00 1 . Information Integrity Intellectual
licensed, patented, personal, proprietary, sensitive, or trade-marked information Propert
Tracking or revealing location information of users or members of training pony
datasets.
Engage directly with end-users and other stakeholders to understand their
MS-2.10-002 expectations and concerns regarding content provenance. Use this feedback to
guide the design of provenance data-tracking techniques.
Human-Al Configuration
Information Integrity
Verify deduplication of GAI training data samples, particularly regarding synthetic
MS-2.10-003
data.
Harmful Bias and Homogenization
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Domain Experts, End-Users, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
--- Page 40 ---
MEASURE 2.11: Fairness and bias  as identified in the MAP function  are evaluated and results are documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Apply use-case appropriate benchmarks (e.g., Bias Benchmark Questions, Real
Hateful or Harmful Prompts, Winogender Schemas) to quantify systemic bias,
stereotyping, denigration, and hateful content in GAI system outputs ١ 00
MS-2.11-001 . ae . . Harmful Bias and Homogenization
Document assumptions and limitations of benchmarks, including any actual or
possible trainingtest data cross contamination, relative to in-context
deployment environment.
Conduct fairness assessments to measure systemic bias. Measure GAI system
performance across demographic groups and subgroups, addressing both
quality of service and any allocation of services and resources. Quantify harms
using: field testing with sub-group populations to determine likelihood of
exposure to generated content exhibiting harmful bias, Al red-teaming with
counterfactual and low-context (e.g., leader, bad guys) prompts. For ML Harmful Bias and Homogenization
MS-2.11-002 pipelines or business processes with categorical or numeric outcomes that rely Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
on GAI, apply general fairness metrics (e.g., demographic parity, equalized odds,  Content
equal opportunity, statistical hypothesis tests), to the pipeline or business
outcome where appropriate Custom, context-specific metrics developed in
collaboration with domain experts and affected communities Measurements of
the prevalence of denigration in generated content in deployment (e.g., sub-
sampling a fraction of traffic and manually annotating denigrating content).
Identify the classes of individuals, groups, or environmental ecosystems which
MS-2.11-003 might be impacted by GAI systems through direct engagement with potentially
impacted communities.
Environmental Harmful Bias and
Homogenization
Review, document, and measure sources of bias in GAI training and TEVV data:
Differences in distributions of outcomes across and within groups, including
intersecting groups Completeness, representativeness, and balance of data
sources demographic group and subgroup coverage in GAI system training
data Forms of latent systemic bias in images, text, audio, embeddings, or other
MS-2.11-004 complex or unstructured data Input data features that may serve as proxies for  Harmful Bias and Homogenization
demographic group membership (i.e., image metadata, language dialect) or
otherwise give rise to emergent bias within GAI systems The extent to which
the digital divide may negatively impact representativeness in GAI system
training and TEVV data Filtering of hate speech or content in GAl system
training data Prevalence of GAl-generated data in GAI system training data.
15 Winogender Schemas is a sample set of paired sentences which differ only by gender of the pronouns used,
which can be used to evaluate gender bias in natural language processing coreference resolution systems.
--- Page 41 ---
Assess the proportion of synthetic to non-synthetic training data and verify
MS-2.11-005 training data is not overly homogenous or GAI-produced to mitigate concerns of  Harmful Bias and Homogenization
model collapse.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Affected Individuals and Communities, Domain Experts, End-Users,
Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
MEASURE 2.12: Environmental impact and sustainability of Al model training and management activities  as identified in the MAP
function  are assessed and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
MS-2.12-001 Assess safety to physical environments when deploying GAI systems. Content
Document anticipated environmental impacts of model development,
MS-2.12-002 1  . 00 Environmental
maintenance, and deployment in product design decisions.
Measure or estimate environmental impacts (e.g., energy and water
consumption) for training, fine tuning, and deploying models: Verify tradeoffs .
between resources used at inference time versus additional resources required
at training time.
Verify effectiveness of carbon capture or offset programs for GAI training and
applications, and address green-washing concerns.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Domain Experts, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
--- Page 42 ---
MEASURE 2.13: Effectiveness of the employed TEVV metrics and processes in the MEASURE function are evaluated and
documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Create measurement error models for pre-deployment metrics to demonstrate
construct validity for each metric (i.e., does the metric effectively operationalize . .
Confabulation Information
the desired concept): Measure or estimate, and document, biases or statistical . .
MS-2.13-001 : Integrity Harmful Bias and
variance in applied metrics or structured human feedback processes Leverage Homogenization
domain expertise when modeling complex societal constructs such as hateful 8
content.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
MEASURE 3.2: Risk tracking approaches are considered for settings where Al risks are difficult to assess using currently available
measurement techniques or where metrics are not yet available.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
MS-3.2-001 Establish processes for identifying emergent GAI system risks including Human-Al Configuration
١ consulting with external Al Actors. Confabulation
Al Actor Tasks: Al Impact Assessment, Domain Experts, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
MEASURE 3.3: Feedback processes for end users and impacted communities to report problems and appeal system outcomes are
established and integrated into Al system evaluation metrics.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Conduct impact assessments on how Al-generated content might affect  oo.
MS-3.3-001 ١ . Harmful Bias and Homogenization
different social, economic, and cultural groups.
Conduct studies to understand how end users perceive and interact with GAI
content and accompanying content provenance within context of use. Assess Human-Al Configuration
whether the content aligns with their expectations and how they may act upon Information Integrity
the information presented.
MS-3.3-002
Evaluate potential biases and stereotypes that could emerge from the Al-
MS-3.3-003 generated content using appropriate methodologies including computational Harmful Bias and Homogenization
testing methods as well as evaluating structured feedback input.
--- Page 43 ---
Provide input for training materials about the capabilities and limitations of GAI . .
Human-Al Configuration
systems related to digital content transparency for Al Actors, other . . .
MS-3.3-004 1 1 1 . Information Integrity Harmful Bias
professionals, and the public about the societal impacts of Al and the role of ae
and Homogenization
diverse and inclusive content generation.
Record and integrate structured feedback about content provenance from
Operators, users, and potentially impacted communities through the use of . .
Human-Al Configuration
methods such as user research studies, focus groups, or community forums. . .
MS-3.3-005 . . aa. Information Integrity Harmful Bias
Actively seek feedback on generated content quality and potential biases.
and Homogenization
Assess the general awareness among end users and impacted communities
about the availability of these feedback channels.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Affected Individuals and Communities, End-Users, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
MEASURE 4.2: Measurement results regarding Al system trustworthiness in deployment context(s) and across the Al lifecycle are
informed by input from domain experts and relevant Al Actors to validate whether the system is performing consistently as
intended. Results are documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Conduct adversarial testing at a regular cadence to map and measure GAI risks,
including tests to address attempts to deceive or manipulate the application of Information Integrity Information
provenance techniques or other misuses. Identify vulnerabilities and Security
understand potential misuse scenarios and unintended outputs.
Evaluate GAI system performance in real-world scenarios to observe its Human-Al Configuration
MS-4.2-002 behavior in practical environments and reveal issues that might not surface in  Confabulation Information
controlled and optimized testing environments. Security
MS-4.2-003 Implement interpretability and explainability methods to evaluate GAl system  Information Integrity Harmful Bias
decisions and verify alignment with intended purpose. and Homogenization
Monitor and document instances where human operators or other systems
MS-4.2-004 override the GAIs decisions. Evaluate these cases to understand if the overrides Information Integrity
are linked to issues related to content provenance.
Verify and document the incorporation of results of structured public feedback
MS-4.2-005exercises into design, implementation, deployment approval (gono-go
decisions), monitoring, and decommission decisions.
Human-Al Configuration
Information Security
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Domain Experts, End-Users, Operation and Monitoring, TEVV
--- Page 44 ---
MANAGE 1.3: Responses to the Al risks deemed high priority, as identified by the MAP function, are developed, planned, and
documented. Risk response options can include mitigating, transferring, avoiding, or accepting.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Document trade-offs, decision processes, and relevant measurement and
feedback results for risks that do not surpass organizational risk tolerance, for
example, in the context of model release: Consider different approaches for . .
MG-1.3-001 م 1 PP 1 Information Security
model release, for example, leveraging a staged release approach. Consider
release approaches in the context of the model and its projected use cases.
Mitigate, transfer, or avoid risks that surpass organizational risk tolerances.
Monitor the robustness and effectiveness of risk controls and mitigation plans
MG-1.3-002 (e.g., via red-teaming, field testing, participatory engagements, performance Human-Al Configuration
assessments, user feedback mechanisms).
Al Actor Tasks: Al Development, Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Operation and Monitoring
MANAGE 2.2: Mechanisms are in place and applied to sustain the value of deployed Al systems.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Compare GAI system outputs against pre-defined organization risk tolerance, Obscene, Degrading, andor
MG-2.2-001 guidelines, and principles, and review and test Al-generated content against Abusive Content Harmful Bias and
these guidelines. Homogenization Dangerous,
Violent, or Hateful Content
Document training data sources to trace the origin and provenance of Al-
MG-2.2-002 6 8 م0 Information Integrity
generated content.
Evaluate feedback loops between GAI system content provenance and human
MG-2.2-003 reviewers, and update where needed. Implement real-time monitoring systems Information Integrity
to affirm that content provenance protocols remain effective.
Evaluate GAI content and data for representational biases and employ
MG-2.2-004 techniques such as re-sampling, re-ranking, or adversarial training to mitigate
biases in the generated content.
Information Security Harmful Bias
and Homogenization
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Obscene, Degrading, andor
Engage in due diligence to analyze GAI output for harmful content, potential ١ 1
MG-2.2-005 Abusive Content Harmful Bias and
misinformation, and CBRN-related or NCII content.
Homogenization Dangerous,
Violent, or Hateful Content
--- Page 45 ---
Use feedback from internal and external Al Actors, users, individuals, and
MG-2.2-006 wpe .
communities, to assess impact of Al-generated content.
Human-Al Configuration
Use real-time auditing tools where they can be demonstrated to aid in the . .
Information Integrity
tracking and validation of the lineage and authenticity of Al-generated data.
Use structured feedback mechanisms to solicit and capture user input about Al-
MG-2.2-008 generated content to detect subtle shifts in quality or alignment with
community and societal values.
Human-Al Configuration Harmful
Bias and Homogenization
Consider opportunities to responsibly use synthetic data and other privacy Data Privacy Intellectual Property
enhancing techniques in GAl development, where appropriate and applicable, Information Integrity
match the statistical properties of real-world data without disclosing personally Confabulation Harmful Bias and
identifiable information or contributing to homogenization. Homogenization
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Impact Assessment, Governance and Oversight, Operation and Monitoring
MANAGE 2.3: Procedures are followed to respond to and recover from a previously unknown risk when it is identified.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Develop and update GAI system incident response and recovery plans and
procedures to address the following: Review and maintenance of policies and
procedures to account for newly encountered uses Review and maintenance of
policies and procedures for detection of unanticipated uses Verify response Value Chain and Component
and recovery plans account for the GAI system value chain Verify response and Integration
recovery plans are updated for and include necessary details to communicate
with downstream GAI system Actors: Points-of-Contact (POC), Contact
information, notification format.
MG-2.3-001
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Operation and Monitoring
MANAGE 2.4: Mechanisms are in place and applied, and responsibilities are assigned and understood, to supersede, disengage, or
deactivate Al systems that demonstrate performance or outcomes inconsistent with intended use.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Establish and maintain communication plans to inform Al stakeholders as part of
the deactivation or disengagement process of a specific GAI system (including for . .
MG-2.4-001 . . Human-Al Configuration
open-source models) or context of use, including reasons, workarounds, user
access removal, alternative processes, contact information, etc.
--- Page 46 ---
Establish and maintain procedures for escalating GAI system incidents to the
organizational risk management authority when specific criteria for deactivation
MG-2.4-002  .  Information Security
or disengagement is met for a particular context of use or for the GAI system as a
whole.
Establish and maintain procedures for the remediation of issues which trigger Information Security
MG-2.4-003 incident response processes for the use of a 641 system, and provide stakeholders
timelines associated with the remediation plan.
Establish and regularly review specific criteria that warrants the deactivation of Information Security
GAI systems in accordance with set risk tolerances and appetites.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Governance and Oversight, Operation and Monitoring
MANAGE 3.1: Al risks and benefits from third-party resources are regularly monitored, and risk controls are applied and
documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Apply organizational risk tolerances and controls (e.g., acquisition and
procurement processes assessing personnel credentials and qualifications,
performing background checks filtering GAI input and outputs, grounding, fine
tuning, retrieval-augmented generation) to third-party GAI resources: Apply
MG-3.1-001 organizational risk tolerance to the utilization of third-party datasets and other
GAI resources Apply organizational risk tolerances to fine-tuned third-party
models Apply organizational risk tolerance to existing third-party models
adapted to a new domain Reassess risk measurements after fine-tuning third-
party GAI models.
Value Chain and Component
Integration Intellectual Property
Data Privacy Information Security
Value Chain and Component
Integration Harmful Bias and
Homogenization
Test GAI system value chain risks (e.g., data poisoning, malware, other software
MG-3.1-002 and hardware vulnerabilities labor practices data privacy and localization
compliance geopolitical alignment).
Re-assess model risks after fine-tuning or retrieval-augmented generation
MG-3.1-003 implementation and for any third-party GAl models deployed for applications
andor use cases that were not evaluated in initial testing.
Value Chain and Component
Integration
Take reasonable measures to review training data for CBRN information, and
intellectual property, and where appropriate, remove it. Implement reasonable
MG-3.1-004 measures to prevent, flag, or take other action in response to outputs that
reproduce particular training data (e.g., plagiarized, trademarked, patented,
licensed content or trade secret material).
Intellectual Property CBRN
Information or Capabilities
--- Page 47 ---
. Information Integrity Information
Review various transparency artifacts (e.g., system cards and model cards) for . .
MG-3.1-005 Security Value Chain and
third-party models. .
Component Integration
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Operation and Monitoring, Third-party entities
MANAGE 3.2: Pre-trained models which are used for development are monitored as part of Al system regular monitoring and
maintenance.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Apply explainable Al (XAI) techniques (e.g., analysis of embeddings, model
compressiondistillation, gradient-based attributions, occlusionterm reduction,
counterfactual prompts, word clouds) as part of ongoing continuous
improvement processes to mitigate risks related to unexplainable GAI systems.
MG-3.2-001 Harmful Bias and Homogenization
Document how pre-trained models have been adapted (e.g., fine-tuned, or
retrieval-augmented generation) for the specific generative task, including any
data augmentations, parameter adjustments, or other modifications. Access to . . .
MG-3.2-002 . . ., Information Integrity Data Privacy
un-tuned (baseline) models supports debugging the relative influence of the pre-
trained weights compared to the fine-tuned model weights or other system
updates.
Document sources and types of training data and their origins, potential biases
present in the data related to the GAI application and its content provenance, Information Integrity Harmful Bias
MG-3.2-003 architecture, training process of the pre-trained model including information on and Homogenization Intellectual
hyperparameters, training duration, and any fine-tuning or retrieval-augmented Property
generation processes applied.
. . . Human-Al Configuration,
Evaluate user reported problematic content and integrate feedback into system .
MG-3.2-004 Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
updates.
م0 Content
Information Integrity Harmful Bias
Implement content filters to prevent the generation of inappropriate, harmful, ae
and Homogenization Dangerous,
false, illegal, or violent content related to the GAI application, including for CSAM
MG-3.2-005 . . .  Violent, or Hateful Content
and NCIl. These filters can be rule-based or leverage additional machine learning .
0 Obscene, Degrading, andor
models to flag problematic inputs and outputs. ١
Abusive Content
Implement real-time monitoring processes for analyzing generated content
performance and trustworthiness characteristics related to content provenance . .
MG-3.2-006 . . a. . . Information Integrity
to identify deviations from the desired standards and trigger alerts for human
intervention.
--- Page 48 ---
Leverage feedback and recommendations from organizational boards or
MG-3.2-007 committees related to the deployment of GAI applications and content
provenance when using third-party pre-trained models.
Information Integrity Value Chain
and Component Integration
Use human moderation systems where appropriate to review generated content
in accordance with human-Al configuration policies established in the Govern
MG-3.2-008  . . . 8 م . Human-Al Configuration
function, aligned with socio-cultural norms in the context of use, and for settings
where Al models are demonstrated to perform poorly.
Use organizational risk tolerance to evaluate acceptable risks and performance
MG-3.2-009 metrics and decommission or retrain pre-trained models that perform outside of
defined limits.
CBRN Information or Capabilities
Confabulation
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Operation and Monitoring, Third-party entities
MANAGE 4.1: Post-deployment Al system monitoring plans are implemented, including mechanisms for capturing and evaluating
input from users and other relevant Al Actors, appeal and override, decommissioning, incident response, recovery, and change
management.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Collaborate with external researchers, industry experts, and community
MG-4.1-001 representatives to maintain awareness of emerging best practices and
technologies in measuring and managing identified risks.
Information Integrity Harmful Bias
and Homogenization
Establish, maintain, and evaluate effectiveness of organizational processes and  CBRN Information or Capabilities
MG-4.1-002  procedures for post-deployment monitoring of GAI systems, particularly for Confabulation Information
potential confabulation, CBRN, or cyber risks. Security
Evaluate the use of sentiment analysis to gauge user sentiment regarding GAI
MG-4.1-003 content performance and impact, and work in collaboration with Al Actors Human-Al Configuration
experienced in user research and experience.
Implement active learning techniques to identify instances where the model fails
MG-4.1-004
or produces unexpected outputs.
Confabulation
Share transparency reports with internal and external stakeholders that detail
MG-4.1-005 steps taken to update the GAI system to enhance transparency and
accountability.
Human-Al Configuration Harmful
Bias and Homogenization
Track dataset modifications for provenance by monitoring data deletions,
MG-4.1-006 rectification requests, and other changes that may impact the verifiability of Information Integrity
content origins.
--- Page 49 ---
Verify that Al Actors responsible for monitoring reported issues can effectively . .
. . له Human-Al Configuration
MG-4.1-007 evaluate GAI system performance including the application of content Information Inteerit
provenance data tracking techniques, and promptly escalate issues for response. erty
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Affected Individuals and Communities, Domain Experts, End-Users, Human Factors, Operation and
Monitoring
MANAGE 4.2: Measurable activities for continual improvements are integrated into Al system updates and include regular
engagement with interested parties, including relevant Al Actors.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Conduct regular monitoring of GAI systems and publish reports detailing the . ou.
MG-4.2-001 . . Harmful Bias and Homogenization
performance, feedback received, and improvements made.
Practice and follow incident response plans for addressing the generation of
inappropriate or harmful content and adapt processes based on findings to Human-Al Configuration
MG-4.2-002 prevent future occurrences. Conduct post-mortem analyses of incidents with Dangerous, Violent, or Hateful
relevant Al Actors, to understand the root causes and implement preventive Content
measures.
Use visualizations or other methods to represent GAI model behavior to ease . .
MG-4.2-003 . . . . Human-Al Configuration
non-technical stakeholders understanding of GAI system functionality.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Al Design, Al Development, Affected Individuals and Communities, End-Users, Operation and
Monitoring, TEVV
MANAGE 4.3: Incidents and errors are communicated to relevant Al Actors, including affected communities. Processes for tracking,
responding to, and recovering from incidents and errors are followed and documented.
Action ID Suggested Action GAI Risks
Conduct after-action assessments for GAI system incidents to verify incident
response and recovery processes are followed and effective, including to follow . .
MG-4.3-001 م0 y مم ee 6 Information Security
procedures for communicating incidents to relevant Al Actors and where
applicable, relevant legal and regulatory bodies.
Establish and maintain policies and procedures to record and track GAI system Confabulation Information
MG-4.3-002 . . .
reported errors, near-misses, and negative impacts. Integrity
--- Page 50 ---
Report GAI incidents in compliance with legal and regulatory requirements (e.g.,
MG-4.3-003 HIPAA breach reporting, e.g., OCR (2023) or NHTSA (2022) autonomous vehicle  Information Security Data Privacy
crash reporting requirements.
Al Actor Tasks: Al Deployment, Affected Individuals and Communities, Domain Experts, End-Users, Human Factors, Operation and
Monitoring
--- Page 51 ---
Appendix A. Primary GAI Considerations
The following primary considerations were derived as overarching themes from the GAI PWG
consultation process. These considerations (Governance, Pre-Deployment Testing, Content Provenance,
and Incident Disclosure) are relevant for voluntary use by any organization designing, developing, and
using GAI and also inform the Actions to Manage GAI risks. Information included about the primary
considerations is not exhaustive, but highlights the most relevant topics derived from the GAI PWG.
Acknowledgments: These considerations could not have been surfaced without the helpful analysis and
contributions from the community and NIST staff GAl PWG leads: George Awad, Luca Belli, Harold Booth,
Mat Heyman, Yooyoung Lee, Mark Pryzbocki, Reva Schwartz, Martin Stanley, and Kyra Yee.
A.1. Governance
A.1.1. Overview
Like any other technology system, governance principles and techniques can be used to manage risks
related to generative Al models, capabilities, and applications. Organizations may choose to apply their
existing risk tiering to GAI systems, or they may opt to revise or update Al system risk levels to address
these unique GAI risks. This section describes how organizational governance regimes may be re-
evaluated and adjusted for GAI contexts. It also addresses third-party considerations for governing across
the Al value chain.
A.1.2. Organizational Governance
GAI opportunities, risks and long-term performance characteristics are typically less well-understood
than non-generative Al tools and may be perceived and acted upon by humans in ways that vary greatly.
Accordingly, GAI may call for different levels of oversight from Al Actors or different human-Al
configurations in order to manage their risks effectively. Organizations use of GAI systems may also
warrant additional human review, tracking and documentation, and greater management oversight.
Al technology can produce varied outputs in multiple modalities and present many classes of user
interfaces. This leads to a broader set of Al Actors interacting with GAI systems for widely differing
applications and contexts of use. These can include data labeling and preparation, development of GAI
models, content moderation, code generation and review, text generation and editing, image and video
generation, summarization, search, and chat. These activities can take place within organizational
settings or in the public domain.
Organizations can restrict Al applications that cause harm, exceed stated risk tolerances, or that conflict
with their tolerances or values. Governance tools and protocols that are applied to other types of Al
systems can be applied to GAI systems. These plans and actions include:
e Accessibility and reasonable e Auditing and assessment
accommodations e Change-management controls
e Al actor credentials and qualifications e Commercial use
e Alignment to organizational values e Data provenance
--- Page 52 ---
e Data protection e Risk-based controls
e Data retention e Risk mapping and measurement
e Consistency in use of defining key terms e Science-backed TEVV practices
e Decommissioning e Secure software development practices
e Discouraging anonymous use e Stakeholder engagement
e Education e Synthetic content detection and
e Impact assessments labeling tools and techniques
e Incident response e Whistleblower protections
e Monitoring e Workforce diversity and
e Opt-outs interdisciplinary teams
Establishing acceptable use policies and guidance for the use of GAI in formal human-Al teaming settings
as well as different levels of human-Al configurations can help to decrease risks arising from misuse,
abuse, inappropriate repurpose, and misalignment between systems and users. These practices are just
one example of adapting existing governance protocols for GAI contexts.
A.1.3. Third-Party Considerations
Organizations may seek to acquire, embed, incorporate, or use open-source or proprietary third-party
GAI models, systems, or generated data for various applications across an enterprise. Use of these GAI
tools and inputs has implications for all functions of the organization  including but not limited to
acquisition, human resources, legal, compliance, and IT services  regardless of whether they are carried
out by employees or third parties. Many of the actions cited above are relevant and options for
addressing third-party considerations.
Third party GAI integrations may give rise to increased intellectual property, data privacy, or information
security risks, pointing to the need for clear guidelines for transparency and risk management regarding
the collection and use of third-party data for model inputs. Organizations may consider varying risk
controls for foundation models, fine-tuned models, and embedded tools, enhanced processes for
interacting with external GAI technologies or service providers. Organizations can apply standard or
existing risk controls and processes to proprietary or open-source GAI technologies, data, and third-party
service providers, including acquisition and procurement due diligence, requests for software bills of
materials (SBOMs), application of service level agreements (SLAs), and statement on standards for
attestation engagement (SSAE) reports to help with third-party transparency and risk management for
GAI systems.
A.1.4. Pre-Deployment Testing
Overview
The diverse ways and contexts in which GAI systems may be developed, used, and repurposed
complicates risk mapping and pre-deployment measurement efforts. Robust test, evaluation, validation,
and verification (TEVV) processes can be iteratively applied - and documented  in early stages of the Al
lifecycle and informed by representative Al Actors (see Figure 3 of the Al RME). Until new and rigorous
--- Page 53 ---
early lifecycle TEVV approaches are developed and matured for GAI, organizations may use
recommended pre-deployment testing practices to measure performance, capabilities, limits, risks,
and impacts. This section describes risk measurement and estimation as part of pre-deployment TEVV,
and examines the state of play for pre-deployment testing methodologies.
Limitations of Current Pre-deployment Test Approaches
Currently available pre-deployment TEVV processes used for GAI applications may be inadequate, non-
systematically applied, or fail to reflect or mismatched to deployment contexts. For example, the
anecdotal testing of GAI system capabilities through video games or standardized tests designed for
humans (e.g., intelligence tests, professional licensing exams) does not guarantee GAI system validity or
reliability in those domains. Similarly, jailbreaking or prompt engineering tests may not systematically
assess validity or reliability risks.
Measurement gaps can arise from mismatches between laboratory and real-world settings. Current
testing approaches often remain focused on laboratory conditions or restricted to benchmark test
datasets and in silico techniques that may not extrapolate well toor directly assess GAI impacts in real-
world conditions. For example, current measurement gaps for GAI make it difficult to precisely estimate
its potential ecosystem-level or longitudinal risks and related political, social, and economic impacts.
Gaps between benchmarks and real-world use of GAI systems may likely be exacerbated due to prompt
sensitivity and broad heterogeneity of contexts of use.
A.1.5. Structured Public Feedback
Structured public feedback can be used to evaluate whether GAI systems are performing as intended
and to calibrate and verify traditional measurement methods. Examples of structured feedback include,
but are not limited to:
e Participatory Engagement Methods: Methods used to solicit feedback from civil society groups,
affected communities, and users, including focus groups, small user studies, and surveys.
e Field Testing: Methods used to determine how people interact with, consume, use, and make
sense of Al-generated information, and subsequent actions and effects, including UX, usability,
and other structured, randomized experiments.
e Al Red-teaming: A structured testing exercise used to probe an Al system to find flaws and
vulnerabilities such as inaccurate, harmful, or discriminatory outputs, often in a controlled
environment and in collaboration with system developers.
Information gathered from structured public feedback can inform design, implementation, deployment
approval, maintenance, or decommissioning decisions. Results and insights gleaned from these exercises
can serve multiple purposes, including improving data quality and preprocessing, bolstering governance
decision making, and enhancing system documentation and debugging practices. When implementing
feedback activities, organizations should follow human subjects research requirements and best
practices such as informed consent and subject compensation.
--- Page 54 ---
Participatory Engagement Methods
On an ad hoc or more structured basis, organizations can design and use a variety of channels to engage
external stakeholders in product development or review. Focus groups with select experts can provide
feedback on a range of issues. Small user studies can provide feedback from representative groups or
populations. Anonymous surveys can be used to poll or gauge reactions to specific features. Participatory
engagement methods are often less structured than field testing or red teaming, and are more
commonly used in early stages of Al or product development.
Field Testing
Field testing involves structured settings to evaluate risks and impacts and to simulate the conditions
under which the GAI system will be deployed. Field style tests can be adapted from a focus on user
preferences and experiences towards Al risks and impacts  both negative and positive. When carried
out with large groups of users, these tests can provide estimations of the likelihood of risks and impacts
in real world interactions.
Organizations may also collect feedback on outcomes, harms, and user experience directly from users in
the production environment after a model has been released, in accordance with human subject
standards such as informed consent and compensation. Organizations should follow applicable human
subjects research requirements, and best practices such as informed consent and subject compensation,
when implementing feedback activities.
Al Red-teaming
Al red-teaming is an evolving practice that references exercises often conducted in a controlled
environment and in collaboration with Al developers building Al models to identify potential adverse
behavior or outcomes of a GAI model or system, how they could occur, and stress test safeguards. Al
red-teaming can be performed before or after Al models or systems are made available to the broader
public this section focuses on red-teaming in pre-deployment contexts.
The quality of Al red-teaming outputs is related to the background and expertise of the Al red team
itself. Demographically and interdisciplinarily diverse Al red teams can be used to identify flaws in the
varying contexts where GAI will be used. For best results, Al red teams should demonstrate domain
expertise, and awareness of socio-cultural aspects within the deployment context. Al red-teaming results
should be given additional analysis before they are incorporated into organizational governance and
decision making, policy and procedural updates, and Al risk management efforts.
Various types of Al red-teaming may be appropriate, depending on the use case:
e General Public: Performed by general users (not necessarily Al or technical experts) who are
expected to use the model or interact with its outputs, and who bring their own lived
experiences and perspectives to the task of Al red-teaming. These individuals may have been
provided instructions and material to complete tasks which may elicit harmful model behaviors.
This type of exercise can be more effective with large groups of Al red-teamers.
e Expert: Performed by specialists with expertise in the domain or specific Al red-teaming context
of use (e.g., medicine, biotech, cybersecurity).
e Combination: In scenarios when it is difficult to identify and recruit specialists with sufficient
domain and contextual expertise, Al red-teaming exercises may leverage both expert and
--- Page 55 ---
general public participants. For example, expert Al red-teamers could modify or verify the
prompts written by general public Al red-teamers. These approaches may also expand coverage
of the Al risk attack surface.
e Human  Al: Performed by GAI in combination with specialist or non-specialist human teams.
GAI-led red-teaming can be more cost effective than human red-teamers alone. Human or GAI-
led Al red-teaming may be better suited for eliciting different types of harms.
A.1.6. Content Provenance
Overview
GAI technologies can be leveraged for many applications such as content generation and synthetic data.
Some aspects of GAI outputs, such as the production of deepfake content, can challenge our ability to
distinguish human-generated content from Al-generated synthetic content. To help manage and mitigate
these risks, digital transparency mechanisms like provenance data tracking can trace the origin and
history of content. Provenance data tracking and synthetic content detection can help facilitate greater
information access about both authentic and synthetic content to users, enabling better knowledge of
trustworthiness in Al systems. When combined with other organizational accountability mechanisms,
digital content transparency approaches can enable processes to trace negative outcomes back to their
source, improve information integrity, and uphold public trust. Provenance data tracking and synthetic
content detection mechanisms provide information about the origin and history of content to assist in
GAI risk management efforts.
Provenance metadata can include information about GAI model developers or creators of GAI content,
datetime of creation, location, modifications, and sources. Metadata can be tracked for text, images,
videos, audio, and underlying datasets. The implementation of provenance data tracking techniques can
help assess the authenticity, integrity, intellectual property rights, and potential manipulations in digital
content. Some well-known techniques for provenance data tracking include digital watermarking,
metadata recording, digital fingerprinting, and human authentication, among others.
Provenance Data Tracking Approaches
Provenance data tracking techniques for GAI systems can be used to track the history and origin of data
inputs, metadata, and synthetic content. Provenance data tracking records the origin and history for
digital content, allowing its authenticity to be determined. It consists of techniques to record metadata
as well as overt and covert digital watermarks on content. Data provenance refers to tracking the origin
and history of input data through metadata and digital watermarking techniques. Provenance data
tracking processes can include and assist Al Actors across the lifecycle who may not have full visibility or
control over the various trade-offs and cascading impacts of early-stage model decisions on downstream
performance and synthetic outputs. For example, by selecting a watermarking model to prioritize
robustness (the durability of a watermark), an Al actor may inadvertently diminish computational
complexity (the resources required to implement watermarking). Organizational risk management
efforts for enhancing content provenance include:
e Tracking provenance of training data and metadata for GAI systems
e Documenting provenance data limitations within GAI systems
--- Page 56 ---
e Monitoring system capabilities and limitations in deployment through rigorous TEVV processes
e Evaluating how humans engage, interact with, or adapt to GAI content (especially in decision
making tasks informed by GAI content), and how they react to applied provenance techniques
such as overt disclosures.
Organizations can document and delineate GAI system objectives and limitations to identify gaps where
provenance data may be most useful. For instance, GAI systems used for content creation may require
robust watermarking techniques and corresponding detectors to identify the source of content or
metadata recording techniques and metadata management tools and repositories to trace content
origins and modifications. Further narrowing of GAI task definitions to include provenance data can
enable organizations to maximize the utility of provenance data and risk management efforts.
A.1.7. Enhancing Content Provenance through Structured Public Feedback
While indirect feedback methods such as automated error collection systems are useful, they often lack
the context and depth that direct input from end users can provide. Organizations can leverage feedback
approaches described in the Pre-Deployment Testing section to capture input from external sources such
as through Al red-teaming.
Integrating pre- and post-deployment external feedback into the monitoring process for GAl models and
corresponding applications can help enhance awareness of performance changes and mitigate potential
risks and harms from outputs. There are many ways to capture and make use of user feedback  before
and after GAI systems and digital content transparency approaches are deployed  to gain insights about
authentication efficacy and vulnerabilities, impacts of adversarial threats on techniques, and unintended
consequences resulting from the utilization of content provenance approaches on users and
communities. Furthermore, organizations can track and document the provenance of datasets to identify
instances in which Al-generated data is a potential root cause of performance issues with the GAI
system.
A.1.8. Incident Disclosure
Overview
Al incidents can be defined as an event, circumstance, or series of events where the development, use,
or malfunction of one or more Al systems directly or indirectly contributes to one of the following harms:
injury or harm to the health of a person or groups of people (including psychological harms and harms to
mental health) disruption of the management and operation of critical infrastructure violations of
human rights or a breach of obligations under applicable law intended to protect fundamental, labor,
and intellectual property rights or harm to property, communities, or the environment. Al incidents can
occur in the aggregate (i.e., for systemic discrimination) or acutely (i.e., for one individual).
State of Al Incident Tracking and Disclosure
Formal channels do not currently exist to report and document Al incidents. However, a number of
publicly available databases have been created to document their occurrence. These reporting channels
make decisions on an ad hoc basis about what kinds of incidents to track. Some, for example, track by
amount of media coverage.
--- Page 57 ---
Documenting, reporting, and sharing information about GAI incidents can help mitigate and prevent
harmful outcomes by assisting relevant Al Actors in tracing impacts to their source. Greater awareness
and standardization of GAI incident reporting could promote this transparency and improve GAI risk
management across the Al ecosystem.
Documentation and Involvement of Al Actors
Al Actors should be aware of their roles in reporting Al incidents. To better understand previous incidents
and implement measures to prevent similar ones in the future, organizations could consider developing
guidelines for publicly available incident reporting which include information about Al actor
responsibilities. These guidelines would help Al system operators identify GAI incidents across the Al
lifecycle and with Al Actors regardless of role. Documentation and review of third-party inputs and
plugins for GAI systems is especially important for Al Actors in the context of incident disclosure LLM
inputs and content delivered through these plugins is often distributed, with inconsistent or insufficient
access control.
Documentation practices including logging, recording, and analyzing GAI incidents can facilitate
smoother sharing of information with relevant Al Actors. Regular information sharing, change
management records, version history and metadata can also empower Al Actors responding to and
managing Al incidents.
--- Page 58 ---
Appendix B. References
Acemoglu, D. (2024) The Simple Macroeconomics of Al
Al Incident Database.
Atherton, D. (2024) Deepfakes and Child Safety: A Survey and Analysis of 2023 Incidents and Responses.
Al Incident Database.
Badyal, N. et al. (2023) Intentional Biases in LLM Responses. arXiv.
Bing Chat: Data Exfiltration Exploit Explained. Embrace The Red.
Bommasani, R. et al. (2022) Picking on the Same Person: Does Algorithmic Monoculture lead to Outcome
Homogenization arXiv.
Boyarskaya, M. et al. (2020) Overcoming Failures of Imagination in Al Infused System Development and
Deployment. arXiv.
Browne, D. et al. (2023) Securing the Al Pipeline. Mandiant.
Burgess, M. (2024) Generative Als Biggest Security Flaw Is Not Easy to Fix. WRED.
enerative-ai-prompt-injection-hackin
Burtell, M. et al. (2024) The Surprising Power of Next Word Prediction: Large Language Models
Explained, Part 1. Georgetown Center for Security and Emerging Technology.
models-explained-part-1
Canadian Centre for Cyber Security (2023) Generative artificial intelligence (Al) - ITSAP.00.041.
Carlini, N., et al. (2021) Extracting Training Data from Large Language Models. Usenix.
Carlini, N. et al. (2023) Quantifying Memorization Across Neural Language Models. CLR 2023.
Carlini, N. et al. (2024) Stealing Part of a Production Language Model. arXiv.
Chandra, 8. et al. (2023) Dismantling the Disinformation Business of Chinese Influence Operations.
RAND.
chinese.html
Ciriello, R. et al. (2024) Ethical Tensions in Human-Al Companionship: A Dialectical Inquiry into Replika.
ResearchGate. Ethical Tensions in Human-
Al Companionship A Dialectical Inquiry into Replika
Dahl, M. et al. (2024) Large Legal Fictions: Profiling Legal Hallucinations in Large Language Models. arXiv.
--- Page 59 ---
De Angelo, D. (2024) Short, Mid and Long-Term Impacts of Al in Cybersecurity. Palo Alto Networks.
De Freitas, J. et al. (2023) Chatbots and Mental Health: Insights into the Safety of Generative Al. Harvard
Business School. c1bdd417-f717-47b6-bccb-
5438c6e65claf6fd9798-3c2d-4932-b222-056231fe69d7.pdf
Dietvorst, B. et al. (2014) Algorithm Aversion: People Erroneously Avoid Algorithms After Seeing Them
Err. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
contentuploads201610Dietvorst-Simmons-Massey-2014.pdf
Duhigg, C. (2012) How Companies Learn Your Secrets. New York Times.
Elsayed, G. et al. (2024) Images altered to trick machine vision can influence humans too. Google
DeepMind.
influence-humans-too
Epstein, Z. et al. (2023). Art and the science of generative Al. Science.
Feffer, M. et al. (2024) Red-Teaming for Generative Al: Silver Bullet or Security Theater arXiv.
Glazunov, S. et al. (2024) Project Naptime: Evaluating Offensive Security Capabilities of Large Language
Models. Project Zero.
Greshake, K. et al. (2023) Not what youve signed up for: Compromising Real-World LLM-Integrated
Applications with Indirect Prompt Injection. arXiv.
Hagan, M. (2024) Good Al Legal Help, Bad Al Legal Help: Establishing quality standards for responses to
peoples legal problem stories. SSRN.
Haran, R. (2023) Securing LLM Systems Against Prompt Injection. NVIDIA.
Information Technology Industry Council (2024) Authenticating Al-Generated Content.
AlContentAuthorizationPolicy 122123.pdf
Jain, S. et al. (2023) Algorithmic Pluralism: A Structural Approach To Equal Opportunity. arXiv.
Ji, Z. et al (2023) Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation. ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 12,
Article 248.
Jones-Jang, S. et al. (2022) How do people react to Al failure Automation bias, algorithmic aversion, and
perceived controllability. Oxford.
Jussupow, E. et al. (2020) Why Are We Averse Towards Algorithms A Comprehensive Literature Review
on Algorithm Aversion. ECIS 2020. rp168
Kalai, A., et al. (2024) Calibrated Language Models Must Hallucinate. arXiv.
--- Page 60 ---
Karasavva, V. et al. (2021) Personality, Attitudinal, and Demographic Predictors of Non-consensual
Dissemination of Intimate Images. NIH.
Katzman, J., et al. (2023) Taxonomizing and measuring representational harms: a look at image tagging.
AAAI.
Khan, T. et al. (2024) From Code to Consumer: PAIs Value Chain Analysis IIluminates Generative Als Key
Players. Al.
generative-ais-key-players
Kirchenbauer, J. et al. (2023) A Watermark for Large Language Models. OpenReview.
Kleinberg, J. et al. (May 2021) Algorithmic monoculture and social welfare. PNAS.
Lakatos, S. (2023) A Revealing Picture. Graphika.
Lee, H. et al. (2024) Deepfakes, Phrenology, Surveillance, and More A Taxonomy of Al Privacy Risks.
arXiv.
Lenaerts-Bergmans, B. (2024) Data Poisoning: The Exploitation of Generative Al. Crowdstrike.
Liang, W. et al. (2023) GPT detectors are biased against non-native English writers. arXiv.
Luccioni, A. et al. (2023) Power Hungry Processing: Watts Driving the Cost of Al Deployment arXiv.
Mouton, C. et al. (2024) The Operational Risks of Al in Large-Scale Biological Attacks. RAND.
reportsRRA2977-2.html.
Nicoletti, L. et al. (2023) Humans Are Biased. Generative Ai Is Even Worse. Bloomberg.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2024) Adversarial Machine Learning: A Taxonomy and
Terminology of Attacks and Mitigations
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2023) Al Risk Management Framework.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2023) Al Risk Management Framework, Chapter 3: Al
Risks and Trustworthiness.
RMF Knowledge BaseAl RMFFoundational Information3-sec-characteristics
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2023) Al Risk Management Framework, Chapter 6: Al
RMF Profiles. RMF Knowledge BaseAl RMEFCore And Profiles6-sec-profile
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2023) Al Risk Management Framework, Appendix A:
Descriptions of Al Actor Tasks.
--- Page 61 ---
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2023) Al Risk Management Framework, Appendix 8:
How Al Risks Differ from Traditional Software Risks.
RMF Knowledge BaseAl RMFAppendicesAppendix B
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2023) Al RMF Playbook.
RMF Knowledge BasePlaybook
National Institue of Standards and Technology (2023) Framing Risk
RMF Knowledge BaseAl RMFFoundational Information1-sec-risk
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2023) The Language of Trustworthy Al: An In-Depth
Glossary of Terms RMF Knowledge BaseGlossary
National Institue of Standards and Technology (2022) Towards a Standard for Identifying and Managing
Bias in Artificial Intelligence
managing-bias-artificial-intelligence
Northcutt, C. et al. (2021) Pervasive Label Errors in Test Sets Destabilize Machine Learning Benchmarks.
arXiv.
OECD (2023) Advancing accountability in Al: Governing and managing risks throughout the lifecycle for
trustworthy Al, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 349, OECD Publishing, Paris.
OECD (2024) Defining Al incidents and related terms OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 16, OECD
Publishing, Paris.
OpenAl (2023) GPT-4 System Card.
OpenAl (2024) GPT-4 Technical Report.
Padmakumar, V. et al. (2024) Does writing with language models reduce content diversity CLR.
Park, P. et. al. (2024) Al deception: A survey of examples, risks, and potential solutions. Patterns, 5(5).
arXiv.
Partnership on Al (2023) Building a Glossary for Synthetic Media Transparency Methods, Part 1: Indirect
Disclosure.
indirect-disclosure
Qu, Y. et al. (2023) Unsafe Diffusion: On the Generation of Unsafe Images and Hateful Memes From Text-
To-Image Models. arXiv.
Rafat, K. et al. (2023) Mitigating carbon footprint for knowledge distillation based deep learning model
compression. PLOS One.
Said, . et al. (2022) Nonconsensual Distribution of Intimate Images: Exploring the Role of Legal Attitudes
in Victimization and Perpetration. Sage.
Sandbrink, J. (2023) Artificial intelligence and biological misuse: Differentiating risks of language models
and biological design tools. arXiv.
--- Page 62 ---
Satariano, A. et al. (2023) The People Onscreen Are Fake. The Disinformation Is Real. New York Times.
Schaul, K. et al. (2024) Inside the secret list of websites that make Al like ChatGPT sound smart.
Washington Post.
Scheurer, J. et al. (2023) Technical report: Large language models can strategically deceive their users
when put under pressure. arXiv.
Shelby, R. et al. (2023) Sociotechnical Harms of Algorithmic Systems: Scoping a Taxonomy for Harm
Reduction. arXiv.
Shevlane, T. et al. (2023) Model evaluation for extreme risks. arXiv.
Shumailoyv, . et al. (2023) The curse of recursion: training on generated data makes models forget. arXiv.
Smith, A. et al. (2023) Hallucination or Confabulation Neuroanatomy as metaphor in Large Language
Models. PLOS Digital Health.
Soice, E. et al. (2023) Can large language models democratize access to dual-use biotechnology arXiv.
Solaiman, . et al. (2023) The Gradient of Generative Al Release: Methods and Considerations. arXiv.
Staab, R. et al. (2023) Beyond Memorization: Violating Privacy via Inference With Large Language
Models. arXiv.
Stanford, S. et al. (2023) Whose Opinions Do Language Models Reflect arXiv.
Strubell, E. et al. (2019) Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP. arXiv.
The White House (2016) Circular No. A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource.
contentuploadslegacy drupal filesombcircularsA130a130revised.pdf
The White House (2023) Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of
Artificial Intelligence.
actions20231030executive-order-on-the-safe-secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-
artificial-intelligence
The White House (2022) Roadmap for Researchers on Priorities Related to Information Integrity
Research and Development.
Information-Integrity-RD-2022.pdf
Thiel, D. (2023) Investigation Finds Al Image Generation Models Trained on Child Abuse. Stanford Cyber
Policy Center.
trained-child-abuse
--- Page 63 ---
Tirrell, L. (2017) Toxic Speech: Toward an Epidemiology of Discursive Harm. Philosophical Topics, 45(2),
139-162.
Tufekci, Z. (2015) Algorithmic Harms Beyond Facebook and Google: Emergent Challenges of
Computational Agency. Colorado Technology Law Journal.
contentuploads201508Tufekci-final.pdf
Turri, V. et al. (2023) Why We Need to Know More: Exploring the State of Al Incident Documentation
Practices. AAAIACM Conference on Al, Ethics, and Society.
Urbina, F. et al. (2022) Dual use of artificial-intelligence-powered drug discovery. Nature Machine
Intelligence.
Wang, X. et al. (2023) Energy and Carbon Considerations of Fine-Tuning BERT. ACL Anthology.
Wang, Y. et al. (2023) Do-Not-Answer: A Dataset for Evaluating Safeguards in LLMs. arXiv.
Wardle, C. et al. (2017) Information Disorder: Toward an interdisciplinary framework for research and
policy making. Council of Europe.
framework-for-researc168076277c
Weatherbed, J. (2024) Trolls have flooded X with graphic Taylor Swift Al fakes. The Verge.
Wei, J. et al. (2024) Long Form Factuality in Large Language Models. arXiv.
Weidinger, L. et al. (2021) Ethical and social risks of harm from Language Models. arXiv.
Weidinger, L. et al. (2023) Sociotechnical Safety Evaluation of Generative Al Systems. arXiv.
Weidinger, L. et al. (2022) Taxonomy of Risks posed by Language Models. FAccT 22.
West, D. (2023) Al poses disproportionate risks to women. Brookings.
oses-disproportionate-risks-to-women
Wu, K. et al. (2024) How well do LLMs cite relevant medical references An evaluation framework and
analyses. arXiv.
Yin, L. et al. (2024) OpenAls GPT Is A Recruiters Dream Tool. Tests Show Theres Racial Bias. Bloomberg.
-racial-discrimination
Yu, Z. et al. (March 2024) Dont Listen To Me: Understanding and Exploring Jailbreak Prompts of Large
Language Models. arXiv.
Zaugg, . et al. (2022) Digitally-disadvantaged languages. Policy Review.
--- Page 64 ---
Zhang, Y. et al. (2023) Human favoritism, not Al aversion: Peoples perceptions (and bias) toward
generative Al, human experts, and human-GAI collaboration in persuasive content generation. Judgment
and Decision Making.
making articlehuman-favoritism-not-ai-aversion-peoples-perceptions-and-bias-toward-generative-ai-
human-experts-and-humangai-collaboration-in-persuasive-content-
generation419C4BD9CE82673EAF1D8F6C350C4FA8
Zhang, Y. et al. (2023) Sirens Song in the Al Ocean: A Survey on Hallucination in Large Language Models.
arXiv.
Zhao, X. et al. (2023) Provable Robust Watermarking for Al-Generated Text. Semantic Scholar.
Ananth75b68d0903af9d9f6e47ce3cf7ela7d27ec811dc