--- Page 3 ---
Contents
1. Introduction
2. An Overview of National Occupational Standards
3. Methodology for Building the National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence
4. Classification of data and Al occupations
5. Job Card Details
6. Annex
--- Page 4 ---
for Data  Artificial Intelligence
--- Page 5 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
The Saudi Data  Al Authority (SDAIA) was established by Royal Order No. (A471) issued on 29121440
AH and The Saudi Data  Al Authority (SDAIA) is the competent authority in the Kingdom concerned with
data and Al including big data. SDAIA is also the national reference in all matters related to the organization,
development, and handling of data and Al in addition, it has the original competence in all matters related to
operation, research, and innovation in the field of data and Al.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia aims to become one of the global leaders in Data and Al. Supporting and
developing national competencies is considered a key enabler for this direction. This focus is expressed
through SDAIAs spearheading of many initiatives, programs and activities to develop human capital, build
capabilities, provide support, enhance the sustainability of national competencies, and link them to future
jobs to create a fertile landscape for national competencies capable of pushing Saudi Arabia to be one of the
advanced countries in Al.
Given its national duty as an authority in data and Al, and its pursuit to regulate the sector, SDAIA issued the
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence as a baseline reference for
those interested in the sector, whether professionals or decision-makers in various organizations, in order to
standardize and improve occupational practices and applications related to developing human capabilities.
--- Page 6 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
2. An Overview of National Occupational Standards
National Occupational Standards are determinants of performance level that an individual must
achieve when performing key job roles, including this performances requirements of experi-
ence, knowledge and abilities that this particular individual needs to continue working at this
occupational standard.
Occupational defines all key occupations in the
sector and is designed primarily through analysis
of expert input.
Standards describe the basic activities a National applies at the national level and can
professional should be able to perform, and the only be developed by a relevant agency
expected accomplishments. recognized by the government.
Ne Figure 1: Basic elements of National Occupational Standards ورم
(National Occupational Standard (NOS))
The standards for each occupation define the key tasks of the job role, including tasks (key job
activities), skills (competencies or acquired experiences), knowledge (academic backgrounds),
and abilities (individual talents). The national frameworks provide a standard-setting instrument
related to each occupation within the sector which serves as a reference guide for organizations
and authorities in applications related to developing their human capabilities. These applications
include several practices, such as recruiting and managing talents, developing job descriptions,
workforce planning, professional guidance and development for individuals, performance eval-
uation, developing accredited professional licenses and certificates, and developing national
occupational policies.
--- Page 7 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
3. Methodology for Building the National Occupational Standard
Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence
The practices of building national standards for occupations are based on three key reference
sources, foremost are subject matter experts (SMEs), followed by job postings, and reviewing
the experiences of other authorities and countries that have previously built standards and oc-
cupational components.
There are several global methodologies for setting a framework for occupational standards,
some of which focus solely on skills, while others are more comprehensive, as they are con-
cerned with all the basic occupational components, from key tasks to skills, knowledge, and
abilities, and this comprehensive methodology.
To build the National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence, in-
ternational best practices and methodologies were followed to develop a special methodology.
The following figure summarizes the most important stages of developing the national standard
framework for such occupations.
--- Page 8 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Working with SMEs (subject Defining occupations and Reviewing various global
matter experts) of these following the best frameworks  local methodologies for
occupations.  practices for developing occupational development
each occupation.  standards.
Collecting occupation data Adopting the most notable
from several sources (SMEs, methodology for developing
publications, research reports). standards that approved
by the Ministry of Human
Resources and Social
Development.
Classifing and coding of Accrediting by the Ministry
data for each occupation of Human Resources and
(Tasks, Skills, Knowledge, Social Development.
Abilities).
Implementing  developing Launching the pilot.
the pilot.
Figure 2: Stages of developing the National Occupational
Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence
--- Page 9 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
The framework methodology was determined to include the occupational components and to
be consistent with the methodology followed by the Ministry of Human Resources and Social
Development (as shown in Figure 3).
Skill Knowledge Ability
Skill Knowledge Ability
Skill Knowledge Ability
Figure 3: Comprehensive Methodology Used by the SDAIA
Experts to Develop the National Occupational Standards
Experience
Skill Knowledge Ability
Job
In addition to the experience of the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Development,
other local practices concerned with developing occupations in various sectors were reviewed,
such as:
General Authority for Statistics.
Saudi Commission for Health Specialties.
Saudi Central Bank.
National Cybersecurity Authority.
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology.
--- Page 10 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
The process of developing the occupational standards framework included reviewing interna-
tional best practices, whether in the business sector, scholarly literature, or national experiences
of other countries specifically related to developing occupations in data and artificial intelligence
sectors.
In the business sector, the latest job postings for occupations in the data and artificial intelli-
gence sectors, especially for major tech companies, were examined to benefit from them in
developing occupational standards 
In scholarly literature, scholarly publications were reviewed and benefited from (such as books
that summarized the experiences and models of some sector experts), and reports from re-
search groups for emerging jobs (such as reports from the European Union for Data and Al, and
competency frameworks for some data occupations at the WHO) Examples of such organiza-tions:
--- Page 11 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
We benefited from the experiences of other countries that developed standards for some data
and Al occupations, such as US, UK, Canada, Australia, and Singapore. In the UK experience,
for example, the skills for data occupations published in its occupational standard framework
known as the Government Digital and Data Profession Capability Framework have been used.
Also, it was benefited from the Canada Job Bank in developing and setting the framework for
some occupations in Al industry. Examples of those countries whose experiences were re-
viewed include:
Canadian Jobs Bank
US National Initiative for Cybersecurity
Australian Government Jobs and Skills Australia
US National Institute of Standards Techn
Future Skills Initiative in Singapore
UK Government Digital and Data Profession Capability Framework
--- Page 12 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Reviewing and studying all these experiences and practices contributed to the development of
a national product that sets a framework for the occupational standards in data and Al sectors
that the Saudi labor market needs.
The National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence was devel-
oped to include five main classifications. These classifications were then branched into ten
specialty areas, from which sixteen occupations emerged. A set of tasks for each occupation
and a list of the skills, Knowledge, and abilities necessary to perform each occupation were also
developed. This resulted in sixteen cards for sixteen occupations that form the core of occupa-
tional standards for data and Al. This framework was developed by a group of SDAIA national
experts specialized in the development of human capabilities.
The validation process took place in three stages to check, review and authenticate the content
of the framework. The first stage was carried out by SDAIA SMEs in data and Al, and the second
and third stages were carried out by national SMEs working in data and Al industry in the labor
market within different sectors, such as: The digital, financial, health and education sectors, and
their comments were reflected on the framework.
This release is a pilot for the purpose of testing the framework, receiving feedback from profes-
sional in the sector, and adding emerging occupations, and it will be updated regularly.
--- Page 13 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
4. Classification of data and Al occupations
The process of classifying occupations can be defined as an inclusive and integral process aiming to
frame data and Al occupations according to nature of work, task execution methods, and qualification
requirements, which resulting in dividing and sorting the occupations in classifications from which
specialty areas and occupations branch off respectively.
Data and Al occupations have been classified into five classifications, which include ten specialty
areas for sixteen occupations. Each occupation is related to a set of key tasks, skills, knowledge, and
abilities.
Governance,
Business
and Leadership
Data Science and Engineering and
Management and Risk Reasearch
Analytics Architecture
Anlaysis
Data analytics
Governance Governance 4 Data Al Data and Al Al
and Business
and Risk and Risk Science Engineering Engineering Architecture Reasearch
Intelligence
Data and Al
Consultancy leadership
Management Management
Data Al
AN Chief Data Al Data Data Data Al Data
Management Reasearch
Consultant Officer Ethicist 3 Analyst Scientist Engineer Engineer Architect 3001
Specialist Scientist
Data
thief Al Al Risk Data Qualit
Quality Modeler
Officer Analyst Analyst Associate
Data
Stewardship
Specialist
Data
Governance
Analyst
--- Page 14 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Table (1) shows the categorization in National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence.
Table (1) the categorization in National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence.
ا
Strategic leadership, business, organization directions
Business and Leadership and vision formulation to achieve the strategic
objectives.
Governing, analyzing, and mitigating the effects to
Governance Management  Risk Analytics ensure the development of responsibilities and ethics of
your use of data and Al technologies.
Collecting, organizing, and studying raw data and using
Date Science  Analytics the advanced analysis techniques to provide visions that
help stakeholders to make decisions.
Designing, developing, executing, operating the Al
solutions that the organization use.
Engineering  Architecture
Researching, innovating, and developing to cope with
Research the development in the Al fields.
--- Page 15 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Table (2) shows the specialty areas in the National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artifi-
cial Intelligence and the classifications they include.
Table (2) specialty areas in the data and Al occupations.
Category Specialty Area
Data  Artificial Intelligence (Al) Leadership
Business and Leadership
Artificial Intelligence (Al) Consultancy
Artificial Intelligence (Al) Governance  Risk Management
Governance Management  Risk Analytics
Data Governance  Management
Data Analytics  Business Intelligence
Date Science  Analytics
Data Science
Data Engineering
Engineering  Architecture Artificial Intelligence (Al) Engineering
Data  Artificial Intelligence (Al) Architect
Research Artificial Intelligence (Al) Research
--- Page 16 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Table (8) illustrates the occupations of the National Occupational Standard Framework for Data
and Artificial Intelligence and the specialty areas they include, since each occupation includes
an identification symbol consisting of the initial letters of the occupations name and the first let-
ter of the field. The letter (D) stands for the data field, and the letters (Al) stands for the artificial
intelligence field. For example, D-CO stands for Chief Data Office.
Field Code
Ranking Occupation Code
1 CHIEF DATA OFFICER D-CO
Data  Artificial Intelligence (Al) Leadership
2 CHIEF Al OFFICER Al-CO
3 Artificial Intelligence (Al) Consultancy Al CONSULTANT دام
4 Artificial Intelligence (Al) Governance Al ETHICIST AI-Eth
5  Risk Management Al RISK ANALYST AI-RA
6 DATA MANAGEMENT SPECIALIST D-MS
7 DATA QUALITY ANALYST D-QA
Data Governance  Management
8 DATA STEWARDSHIP SPECIALIST D-SS
9 DATA GOVERNANCE ANALYST D-GA
10 Data Analytics  Business Intelligence DATA ANALYST D-An
11 Data Science DATA SCIENTIST D-S
12 Data Engineering DATA ENGINEER D-En
pS
13 Artificial Intelligence (Al) Engineering Al ENGINEER Al-En
14 DATA ARCHITECT D-Ar
Data  Artificial Intelligence (Al) Architect
15 DATA MODELER ASSOCIATE D-Ma
16 Artificial Intelligence (Al) Research Al RESEARCH SCIENTIST Al-R
--- Page 17 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Tasks, knowledge, skills, and abilities of each profession specifies the job card details, since
tasks, knowledge, skills, and abilities represent the performance of each profession within the
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence.
D-CO-TO1 Tstands for Task
D stands for Data S stands for Skill
Al stands for Artificial K stands for Knowledge
Intelligence Occupations Code A stands for Ability
--- Page 18 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
5. Job Card Details
5.1 Business and Leadership Category
Chief Data Officer
WORK ROLE Chief Data Officer
OCCUPATION CODE D-CO
Business and Leadership
SPECIALTY AREA Data and Artificial Intelligence (Al) Leadership
GENERAL Chief Data Officer (CDO) is a senior executive responsible for leading the organizations data strategy, governance, and
JOB operations to derive maximum value from its data assets. This job role is responsible for guiding the organization in
DESCRIPTION becoming data-driven, leveraging data to improve decision-making, optimize operations, and achieve strategic objectives.
D-CO-T01 Develop an integrated data strategy aligned with the organizations business objectives.
D-CO-T02 Align the organizations data strategy with its business strategy.
D-CO-T03 Lead the functions of data engineering, analytics, reporting and data governance.
D-CO-T04 Oversee the development and implementation of the Business Intelligence (BI) strategy within an organization
and ensure BI systems meet organizational requirements.
D-CO-T05 Work with stakeholders to develop data policies and associated documentation in alignment with the
organizations data strategy.
D-CO-T06 Ensure sound data ethics and principles are reflected in the organizations mission, vision and goals.
D-CO-T07 Ensure that organizational data strategy is effectively addressed by data policies and related documents.
D-CO-T08 Develop and maintain strategic plans.
D-CO-T09 Create a strategic roadmap for the systematic deployment and integration of essential data capabilities.
D-CO-T10 Oversee the design and construction of a robust data infrastructure.
D-CO-T11 Set guidelines for appropriate structuring and enrichment of data.
D-CO-T12 Design a governance roadmap that prioritizes data quality, data management standards, and security
protocols.
D-CO-T13 Create long-term data governance initiatives that serve to improve data quality across all systems over time.
D-CO-T14 Provide guidance on best practices related to data, including BI, data governance and data analytic.
--- Page 19 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-CO-T15 Monitor and measure the effectiveness of data initiatives.
D-CO-T16 Manage the regular review and maintenance of the organizations data policy and associated documentation.
D-CO-T17 Build and manage a high-performing data team.
D-CO-T18 Promote awareness of data policy and strategy as appropriate among the organizations management.
D-CO-T19 Collaborate with stakeholders in the organization and with third parties when identifying future data strategy
requirements and BI solutions.
D-CO-T20 Determine key messages to communicate from analyses and oversee the creation of a narrative for storytelling.
D-CO-T21 Effectively communicate financial aspects of data related activities to senior management.
D-CO-T22 Acquire and manage the necessary resources, including leadership support, financial resources, and key data
personnel, to support data governance goals and objectives and reduce overall organizational risk.
D-CO-T23 Lead and oversee data budget, staffing, and contracting.
D-CO-T24 Identify, recruit and manage appropriately skilled resources and high-performing data team.
D-CO-T25 Supervise and effectively assign work to staff working on data related tasks.
D-CO-T26 Work with others on policies, processes and procedures relating to data and privacy.
D-CO-T27 Establish guidelines and criteria to direct historical data analytics, architecture, and technology.
D-CO-T28 Advise on processes and procedures for gathering of operational data to examine past business performance
D-CO-T29 Attend and present at international data events.
D-CO-T30 Develop engagement and training programs to enhance the use of data-based technology within the
organization.
D-CO-T31 Stay current with best industry practices and new developments in data, research, competitive business
intelligence, process improvement and business analytics.
D-CO-T32 Stay current on emerging data trends and technologies.
D-CO-T33 Develop use cases for utilizing data to solve organizations problems.
D-CO-T34 Build and operate data warehouses andor data lakes in the organization.
D-CO-T35 Implement data governance regulations and policies and ensure organizations compliance.
--- Page 20 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-CO-S01 Skill in creating policies that reflect data D-CO-S07 Skill to use critical thinking to analyze
SKILLS objectives. organizational patterns and relationships.
D-CO-S02 Skill in designing and building data pipelines. D-CO-S08 Skill in developing policies which reflect the
D-CO-S03 Skill in building Business Intelligence (Bl), organizations business and data strategic
data capabilities and skill sets across the objectives.
organization. D-CO-S09 Skill in continually identifying new technologies
D-CO-S04 Skill in determining the normal operational  their potential impact on data requirements.
state for data activities and how that state is D-CO-S10 Skill in mapping business problems to
affected by change. appropriate data technologies.
D-CO-S05 Skill to anticipate new data risks  identifying D-CO-S11 Skill in deriving maximum value from the
them in a timely manner. data available to the organization.
D-CO-S06 Skill in communicating with all levels of
management including Board members
(e.g., interpersonal skills, approachability,
effective listening skills, appropriate use of
style and language for the audience).
D-CO-K01 Knowledge of data concepts, protocols, and D-CO-K10 Knowledge of big data concepts and tools
KNOWLEDGE methodologies. for analyzing large and complex datasets.
D-CO-K02 Knowledge of data warehousing concepts, D-CO-K11 Knowledge of data security best practices
data modeling techniques,  data warehouse and tools for protecting data assets.
platforms. D-CO-K12 Knowledge of data privacy principles, data
D-CO-K03 Knowledge of data lake architectures, data security and privacy risks associated with
ingestion and processing pipelines, and data data collection, storage, and use.
lake management tools. D-CO-K13 Knowledge of the national data regulations
D-CO-K04 Knowledge of data integration tools and  requirements relevant to the organization.
techniques for extracting, transforming, and D-CO-K14 Knowledge of relevant data regulations.
loading (ETL) data from various sources. D-CO-K15 Knowledge of best practices for data
D-CO-K05 Knowledge of data quality dimensions, data management, governance, stewardship and
quality monitoring tools, and data cleansing quality.
techniques. D-CO-K16 Knowledge of emerging data-related issues
D-CO-K06 Knowledge of data governance principles, and risks.
frameworks, and tools for managing data D-CO-K17 Knowledge of data-related competitions
access, security, and privacy. as a way of developing skills by providing
D-CO-K07 Knowledge of data analysis and visualization hands-on experience in simulated real-world
tools. situations.
D-CO-K08 Knowledge of statistical methods and D-CO-K18 Knowledge of the industry landscape,
techniques for data analysis. competitive environment, and market
D-CO-K09 Knowledge of machine learning algorithms trends.
and techniques for predictive modeling and
data classification.
--- Page 21 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-CO-A01 Ability to create clear, concise, and visually D-CO-A11 Ability to prioritize and allocate data
ABILITIES appealing data visualizations. resources correctly and efficiently.
D-CO-A02 Ability to influence  persuade stakeholders. D-CO-A12 Ability to relate strategy, business,  technology
D-CO-A03 Ability to think strategically  translate data in the context of organizational dynamics.
into actionable insights. D-CO-A13 Ability to recognize organizational challenges
D-CO-A04 Ability to work in a fast-paced and dynamic from a  business, management
environment. technological perspective.
D-CO-A05 Ability to develop strategy, policy and related D-CO-A14 Ability to understand technology, management,
documentation to support business strategy and leadership issues related to organization
and maintain compliance with legislative, processes  problem solving.
regulatory and contractual obligations. D-CO-A15 Ability to understand the basic concepts and
D-CO-A06 Ability to apply critical readingthinking. issues related to data and its organizational
D-CO-A07 Ability to exercise judgment when policies impact.
are not well-defined. D-CO-A16 Ability to ensure data management processes
D-CO-A08 Ability to demonstrate critical comprehension are integrated with strategic and operational
of documentation. planning processes.
D-CO-A09 Ability to communicate technical  planning D-CO-A17 Ability to engage with the organizations
information at the same level as a stakeholders leadership to ensure data principles are
understanding. applied in their areas of responsibility.
D-CO-A10 Ability to interpret  apply laws, regulations,
policies,  guidance relevant to organization
data objectives.
- Abachelors degree in computer science, computer systems engineering or a related discipline or completion of a college
EDUCATION program in computer science is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in data science, business management or a related field is usually preferred.
- Experience in data related technology, knowledge management, risk management, research is usually preferred.
- Experience in a management or leadership role is usually required
EXPERIENCE
--- Page 22 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Chief Artificial Intelligence (Al) Officer
WORK ROLE Chief Artificial Intelligence (Al) Officer
OCCUPATION CODE Al-CO
Business and Leadership
SPECIALTY AREA Data and Artificial Intelligence (Al) Leadership
GENERAL The Chief Artificial Intelligence Officer (CAIO) is a C-suite executive responsible for leading the organizations artificial
intelligence (Al) strategy, governance, and operations to unlock the transformative potential of Al across all aspects of the
JOB business. This work role guides the organization in becoming Al-driven, leveraging Al to automate tasks, optimize
DESCRIPTION processes, enhance decision-making, and achieve strategic objectives.
Al-CO-T01 Acquire  manage the necessary resources, including leadership support, financial resources, and key artificial
intelligence personnel, to support artificial intelligence goals and objectives and reduce overall organizational
risk.
Al-CO-T02 Effectively communicate financial aspects of artificial intelligence related activities to senior management.
Al-CO-T03 21 30 and oversee artificial intelligence budget, staffing, and contracting.
Al-CO-T04 2 Supervise and effectively assign work to staff working on artificial intelligence related tasks.
Al-CO-T05 2 Allocate resources to artificial intelligence roles.
Al-CO-T06 2 Develop and maintain strategic plans.
Al-CO-T07 Ensure that artificial intelligence requirements are aligned with the organizations artificial intelligence strategy.
Al-CO-T08  Develop and maintain an artificial intelligence strategy that aligns to the organizations business strategy.
Al-CO-T09 2 Obtain relevant resource to implement and maintain artificial intelligence solutions.
Al-CO-T10 Promote awareness of artificial intelligence policy and strategy as appropriate among the organizations
management.
Al-CO-T11 Work with stakeholders to develop artificial intelligence policies and associated documentation in alignment
with the organizations artificial intelligence strategy.
Al-CO-T12 Align the organizations artificial intelligence strategy with its business strategy.
Al-CO-T13 Work with others on policies, processes and procedures relating to artificial intelligence and privacy.
Al-CO-T14  Ensure sound artificial intelligence principles are reflected in the organizations mission, vision and goals.
Al-CO-T15  Work with others to implement and maintain an artificial intelligence risk management program.
Al-CO-T16 Perform an artificial intelligence risk assessment.
Al-CO-T17 Obtain resources to develop and implement effective processes to meet strategic artificial intelligence goals.
Al-CO-T18 2 Promote and demonstrate the value of artificial intelligence to stakeholders within an organization.
Al-CO-T19  Communicate effectively with third parties in the event of an artificial intelligence incident.
Al-CO-T20 Review the effectiveness of the organizations artificial intelligence controls against its strategic goals.
Al-CO-T21 Manage the regular review and maintenance of the organizations artificial intelligence policy and associated
documentation.
--- Page 23 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-CO-T22 2 Ensure that appropriate actions are taken to mitigate the risk in the event of an artificial intelligence incident.
Al-CO-T23 Advocate artificial intelligence related topics with senior management, to ensure the organizations strategic
goals include artificial intelligence.
Al-CO-T24 2 Ensure that organizational artificial intelligence strategy is effectively addressed by artificial intelligence policies
and related documents.
Al-CO-T25 Ensure artificial intelligence requirements of all information technology systems are determined.
Al-CO-T26 2 Collaborate with stakeholders in the organization and with third parties when identifying future artificial
intelligence strategy requirements.
Al-CO-T27 Identify and recruit appropriately skilled resources to address artificial intelligence activities within the
organization.
Al-CO-T28 Attend and present at international artificial intelligence events.
Al-CO-T29 Develop engagement, rollout and training programs to enhance the use of Al-based technology within the
organization.
Al-CO-T30 2 Stay current with best industry practices and new developments in artificial intelligence, research, competitive
intelligence, process improvement and business analytics.
Al-CO-S01 Skill in creating policies that reflect artificial Al-CO-S09 Skill in overseeing the artificial intelligence
SKILLS intelligence objectives. budget, resources, and infrastructure.
Al-CO-S02 Skill in determining the normal operational Al-CO-S10 Skill in evaluating the artificial intelligence
state for artificial intelligence systems and best practices  adopting the most suitable
how that state is affected by change. ones.
Al-CO-S03 Skill to anticipate new artificial intelligence Al-CO-S11 Skill in tackling the most challenging and
risks and identifying them in a timely manner. critical artificial intelligence problems faced
Al-CO-S04 Skill in communicating with all levels of by the organization.
management including Board members Al-CO-S12 Skill in overseeing all artificial intelligence
(e.g., interpersonal skills, approachability, projects and initiatives, ensuring they align
effective listening skills, appropriate use of with business objectives.
style and language for the audience). Al-CO-S13 Skill in building and maintaining relationships
Al-CO-S05 Skill to use critical thinking to analyze with external artificial intelligence organizations,
organizational patterns and relationships. partners, and communities.
Al-CO-S06 Skill in evaluating the viability and legitimacy Al-CO-S14 Skill in managing and reviewing the output of
of suppliers and products. other Al teams.
Al-CO-S07 Skill in developing policies which reflect the Al-CO-S15 Skill in leading a team of Al scientists and
organizations business  artificial intelligence engineers.
strategic objectives. Al-CO-S16 Skill in fostering a culture of innovation and
Al-CO-S08  Skill in continually identifying new technologies excellence.
their potential impact on artificial intelligence Al-CO-S17 Skill in developing Al use cases to solve
requirements. organizations problems.
--- Page 24 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-CO-K01 Knowledge of artificial intelligence concepts Al-CO-KO9Knowledge of the likely operational impact
KNOWLEDGE and methodologies. on an organization of artificial intelligence
Al-CO-K02Knowledge of artificial intelligence system risks.
design tools, methods and techniques. Al-CO-K10Knowledge of vulnerabilities in artificial
Al-CO-K03Knowledge of the national artificial intelligence intelligence applications  their likely impact.
regulations and requirements relevant to the Al-CO-K11Knowledge of public sources detailing
organization. common risks of artificial intelligence
Al-CO-K04Knowledge of national and organizational systems and mitigations.
document and information classification and Al-CO-K12Knowledge of artificial intelligence and
marking standards, policies and procedures. privacy principles.
Al-CO-KOSKnowledge and understanding of risk Al-CO-K13Knowledge of specific operational impacts
assessment, mitigation and management of artificial intelligence lapses.
methods. Al-CO-K14Knowledge of emerging artificial intelligence
Al-CO-KO6Knowledge of best practices for artificial issues and risks.
intelligence risk management. Al-CO-K15Knowledge of artificial intelligence competitions
Al-CO-K07Knowledge of artificial intelligence aspects as a way of developing skills by providing
of business continuity and disaster recovery hands-on experience in simulated real-world
planning. situations.
Al-CO-KO08Knowledge of relevant artificial intelligence
aspects of legislative and regulatory
requirements, relating to ethics and privacy.
Al-CO-A01 Ability to develop strategy, policy and related Al-CO-A08 Ability to relate strategy, business, and
ABILITIES documentation to support business strategy technology in the context of organizational
and maintain compliance with legislative, dynamics.
regulatory and contractual obligations. Al-CO-A09 Ability to recognize organizational challenges
Al-CO-A02 Ability to apply critical readingthinking. from a business, management  technological
Al-CO-A03 Ability to exercise judgment when policies perspective.
are not well-defined. Al-CO-A10 Ability to understand the basic concepts and
Al-CO-A04 Ability to demonstrate critical comprehension issues related to artificial intelligence and its
of documentation. organizational impact.
Al-CO-A05 Ability to communicate technical  planning Al-CO-A11 Ability to ensure artificial intelligence
information at the same level as a stakeholders management processes are integrated with
understanding. strategic  operational planning processes.
Al-CO-A06 Ability to interpret  apply laws, regulations, Al-CO-A12 Ability to engage with the organizations
policies,  guidance relevant to organization leadership to ensure artificial intelligence
artificial intelligence objectives. principles are applied in their areas of
Al-CO-A07 Ability to prioritize and allocate artificial responsibility.
intelligence resources correctly  efficiently.
--- Page 25 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
- A bachelors degree in computer science, computer systems engineering or a related discipline or completion of a college
program in computer science is usually required.
- Amasters or doctoral degree in artificial intelligence, machine learning, data science, business management or a related
field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
EXPERIENCE - Experience in a management or leadership role is usually required.
--- Page 26 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence (Al) Consultant
WORK ROLE Artificial Intelligence (Al) Consultant
OCCUPATION CODE Al-C
Business and Leadership
SPECIALTY AREA Artificial Intelligence (Al) Consultancy
GENERAL Al consultants use advanced programming  analytics technologies, including machine learning and predictive modelling, to
support the identification of trends, scrape information from unstructured data sources and provide automated
JOB recommendations. They are employed by both private and public consulting firms  information technology departments to
DESCRIPTION deal with big emerging data and new Al algorithms and tools. Al consultants work with multi-disciplinary teams to support
clients in a wide range of data initiatives aiming to generate and present new, useful and actionable insights.
Al-C-T01 Identify and comprehend the specific needs and problems of clients.
Al-C-T02 Formulate artificial intelligence strategies aligned with business objectives.
Al-C-T03 Analyze the impact of solutions and providing guidance for improvement.
Al-C-T04 Research and learn about the latest technologies and tools in the field of data and artificial intelligence.
Al-C-T05 Collaborate with experts in the field of artificial intelligence to support and achieve business goals.
Al-C-T06 Assist and encourages the development of objectives, strategies and plans aimed at achieving clients
satisfaction and the efficient use of organizations resources.
Al-C-T07 Analyze data structures, quality, and patterns for artificial intelligence model development.
Al-C-T08 Create, customize, and implement machine learning models.
Al-C-T09 Evaluate model performance, test for accuracy, and validate results.
Al-C-T10 Work with clients to develop artificial intelligence policies and associated documentation in alignment with the
organizations artificial intelligence strategy.
Al-C-T11 Review artificial intelligence operating procedures and advise on their alignment with the organizations
procedures and standards.
Al-C-T12 Confer with clients to identify and document requirements related to Al projects.
Al-C-T13 Conduct business and technical studies.
Al-C-T14 Design, develop and implement artificial intelligence solutions.
Al-C-T15 Provide advice on artificial intelligence systems strategy, policy, management and service delivery.
Al-C-T16 Integrate artificial intelligence solutions into existing systems or processes.
Al-C-T17 Assess artificial intelligence risks to organizations data and applications.
Al-C-T18 Develop policies, procedures and contingency plans to minimize the effects of artificial intelligence risks.
Al-C-T19 Conduct reviews to assess quality assurance practices, software products and artificial intelligence systems.
Al-C-T20 Analyze and evaluates current artificial intelligence systems and structures.
Al-C-T21 Discusses current artificial intelligence systems with staff and observes systems at all levels of organization.
Al-C-T22 Directs clients towards more efficient organization and develops solutions with artificial intelligence to solve
organizational problems.
Al-C-T23 Directs clients towards obtaining resources to develop and implement effective processes to meet strategic
artificial intelligence goals.
Al-C-T24 Stay current with best industry practices and new developments in artificial intelligence, research, competitive
intelligence, process improvement and business analytics.
Al-C-T25 Continuously monitor artificial intelligence systems, update models, and maintain performance.
Al-C-T26 Educate clients on artificial intelligence technologies, their benefits, and provide ongoing support.
--- Page 27 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Skill in various artificial intelligence techniques, Al-C-S10 Skill in providing guidance and advice to 1-0-501م
SKILLS including machine learning algorithms, such enable decision-making about tasks,
as deep learning models and common situations, and processes.
Al-C-S11 Skill in preparing and delivering written, oral
Al-C-S02 Skill in organizing and coordinating the or visual material for the workplace that
activities of groups and individuals to align presents information.
their activities with organizational objectives. Al-C-S12 Skill in developing alliances, contacts or
AI-C-S03 Skill in a examining  investigating problems, partnerships, and exchanging information
sites or objects to ensure compliance with with others.
safety standards, laws or regulations. Al-C-S13 Skill in directing and monitoring the
Al-C-S04 Skill in examining artificial intelligence activities performance of others.
to determine appropriate actions or Al-C-S14 Skill in directing processes and procedures
recommendations. to ensure they add measurable value.
Al-C-S05 Skill in analytical reasoning, problem solving Al-C-S15 Skill in applying analytical methods including
and critical thinking. exploratory data analysis and statistical
Al-C-S06  Skill in investigating and trying-out new tools testing to a specific data set, to reach
and technologies as they are released. accurate and reliable conclusions.
Al-C-S07 Skill in conveying technical advice  guidance Al-C-S16 Skill in customizing artificial intelligence
to clients. solutions for different sectors based on
understanding sector-specific requirements.
Al-C-S08 Skill in communicating  explaining complex
artificial intelligence concepts to non-technical Al-C-S17 Skill in managing artificial intelligence
stakeholders, and the ability to work in a projects effectively, including planning,
consulting capacity, understanding client resource allocation, and meeting project
needs  providing effective solutions. deadlines.
Al-C-S18 Skill in staying up to date with the latest
Al-C-S09 Skill in building trust and rapport with clients, developments i. artificial intelligence
understanding their needs and concerns, machine learning, and related technologies.
and providing them with the best possible Al-C-S19 Skill in empathizing with customers
service. stakeholders and understand their needs.
Al-C-K01 Knowledge of consulting, client interactions, Al-C-K0O7 Knowledge of principles, techniques and
KNOWLEDGE and understanding client needs to provide tools applied in the development of precision
tailored artificial intelligence (Al) solutions. technical plans, drawings  working models.
Al-C-K02 Knowledge of computer programming and Al-C-KO8 Knowledge of the benefits of applied
coding languages used in artificial intelligence mathematics and statistics in carrying out
development. artificial intelligence tasks.
Al-C-K03 Knowledge of ethical considerations in Al-C-KO9 Knowledge of critique statistical analyses,
artificial intelligence development, ensuring  application of machine learning techniques
fairness, transparency, and accountability in  methodologies.
artificial intelligence systems. Al-C-K10 Knowledge of quantitative  qualitative
Al-C-K04 Knowledge of statistical analysis, data analytics.
manipulation, and data visualization tools. Al-C-K11 Knowledge of the principles and practices of
Al-C-K05 Knowledge of computer vision and natural managing businesses.
language processing techniques. Al-C-K12 Knowledge of main concepts of deep
Al-C-KO6 Knowledge of self-motivation tips for learning.
continuous development. Al-C-K13 Knowledge of national  related international
regulations and policies related to Al.
27
--- Page 28 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-C-A01 Ability to identify business problems and Al-C-A08 Ability to contextualize  extract actionable
ABILITIES develop artificial intelligence (Al) solutions insights from data.
that address those issues effectively. Al-C-A09 Ability to effectively communicate complex
Al-C-A02 Ability to work in a consulting capacity, technical concepts to non-technical
interview customers, understand customer stakeholders, including clients, management,
needs and provide effective solutions. or team members.
Al-C-A03 Ability to collect, clean, and analyze data to Al-C-A10 Ability to work in multidisciplinary teams,
derive meaningful insights. collaborating with data scientists, engineers,
Al-C-A04 Ability to design, develop,  optimize artificial business analysts,  other professionals to
intelligence models tailored to specific deliver comprehensive artificial intelligence
business needs. solutions.
Al-C-A05 Ability to work under tight timelines, in cases AI-C-A11 Ability to travel and work abroad for
for multiple project deliveries. international projects.
Al-C-A06 Ability to work effectively within high- Al-C-A12 Ability to do advanced technical writing skills
performing teams. in Arabic and English (additional languages
Al-C-A07 Ability to to analytically define problems and will be a plus).
create effective artificial intelligence-driven
solutions for business challenges.
- Abachelors degree in computer science, computer systems engineering or a related discipline or completion of a college
EDUCATION program in computer science is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in artificial intelligence, data science, or a related field is usually preferred.
EXPERIENCE - Experience in providing artificial intelligence services is usually required.
--- Page 29 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
5.2 Governance Management and Risk Analytics Category
Artificial Intelligence (Al) Ethicist
WORK ROLE Artificial Intelligence (Al) Ethicist
OCCUPATION CODE Al-Eth
Governance, Management and Risk Analysis
SPECIALTY AREA Artificial Intelligence (Al) Governance and Risk Management
GENERAL
JOB
DESCRIPTION
Al Ethicists are responsible for analyzing and evaluating the ethical implications of Al systems and making
recommendations to ensure that our Al solutions are designed and used responsibly, fairly, and transparently.
Al-Eth-T01 Set policies to ensure artificial intelligence (Al) development adheres to ethical principles and societal norms.
Al-Eth-T02 Conduct reviews to identify potential ethical issues and suggest remedies before an Al project goes live.
Al-Eth-T03 Conduct ethical impact assessments of Al systems, including identifying potential biases, discrimination, and
negative impacts on individuals and society.
Al-Eth-T04 Evaluate potential risks associated with Al projects and ensure these projects comply with existing ethical
guidelines and regulations.
Al-Eth-T05 Review Al algorithms and models to ensure they align with ethical principles and best practices.
Al-Eth-T06 Advise on the ethical implications of Al-related decisions and provide guidance to decision-makers.
Al-Eth-T07 Develop ethical guidelines and policies for developing, deploying, and using Al systems.
Al-Eth-T08 Develop and implement ethical guidelines and policies for Al development and deployment.
Al-Eth-T09 Stay up to date with the latest research, developments, regulations, and best practices in Al ethics and
contribute to the wider Al ethics community.
Al-Eth-T10 Work with legal and regulatory teams to ensure compliance with relevant laws and regulations regarding Al and
ethics.
Al-Eth-T11 Develop and deliver training and educational materials on Al ethics for internal and external audiences.
Al-Eth-T12 Engage with stakeholders, including customers, partners, and the public, to ensure Al systems align with their
values and expectations.
Al-Eth-T13 Ensure the responsible and ethical use of data in Al systems, including protecting the privacy and confidentiality
of sensitive data.
Al-Eth-T14 Leverage tools to improve Als performance and trustworthiness throughout the Al lifecycle.
Al-Eth-T15 Collaborating with cross-functional teams to identify ethical concerns and propose solutions to mitigate them.
Al-Eth-T16 Participate in interdisciplinary teams to develop solutions to complex ethical challenges related to Al.
Al-Eth-T17 Work with business and technical stakeholders to identify and assess potential risks and impacts, recommend
appropriate mitigations, and prevent harm.
Al-Eth-T18 Collaborate with cross-functional teams to integrate ethical considerations into the design  development of Al
systems.
--- Page 30 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-Eth-S01 Skill in establishing policies for responsible Al-Eth-SO7 Skill in supporting effectively other
د artificial intelligence (Al) development. organizational members in implementing Al
AI-Eth-S02 Skill in developing Al ethics tools  translate ethics.
theoretical principles into practice. AI-Eth-S08  Skill in working with consequential or
AI-Eth-S03 Skill in conducting ethics reviews of Al complex risks.
projects. AI-Eth-S09 Skill in applying different risk methodologies
Al-Eth-S04 Skill in assessing potential ethical risks and in proportion to the risk.
ensuring compliance. AI-Eth-S10 Skill in building consensus between services
Al-Eth-S05 Skill in educating and raising awareness of Al or independent stakeholders.
practices  ethics. AI-Eth-S11 Skill in collaborating with cross-functional
Al-Eth-S06 Skill in communicating effectively to explain and interdisciplinary teams.
and raise awareness of data  Al ethics Al-Eth-S12 Skill in working with business stakeholders.
issues, and to listen to, convene, advise, Al-Eth-S13 Skill in ethical impact assessments,
and mediate between various parts of the algorithmic bias,  societal implications of Al.
organization. Al-Eth-S14  Skill in defining ethics benchmarks for
privacy and fairness.
Al-Eth-K01 Knowledge of policy, law, regulatory Al-Eth-K06 Knowledge of relevant Al ethics frameworks
KNOWLEDGE processes,  industry standards in artificial and regulations.
intelligence (Al) or related field. AI-Eth-K07 Knowledge of different values  ethics norms
Al-Eth-K02 Knowledge of ethical principles and theories among different cultures, and adapt to local
and their applications to Al. values and ethics norms.
Al-Eth-K03 Knowledge of how technology  Al products Al-Eth-KO8Knowledge of ethics guidelines for the
and services are built. research and development of artificial
Al-Eth-K04 Knowledge of social sciences  Als impact intelligence, such as Asilomar Al Principles.
on society.
Al-Eth-KO5Knowledge of ethical principles and best
practices related to Al, including fairness,
transparency, accountability, and human rights.
--- Page 31 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
AI-Eth-A01 Ability to share expertise in writing and AI-Eth-AO5Ability to communicate complex Al ethics
ABILITIES verbally with other members of the team. concepts clearly to stakeholders.
Al-Eth-A02 Ability to communicate  express technical Al-Eth-A06Ability to engage with stakeholders at all
viewpoints to senior stakeholders with levels.
succinctness and clarity. AI-Eth-A07 Ability to think critically and analytically.
AI-Eth-A03 Ability to analyze complex ethical issues and AI-Eth-AO8Ability to trace through complex Al
propose solutions. technologies  data processes to determine
Al-Eth-A04Ability to work independently and manage the cause of harm.
multiple projects  priorities simultaneously.
- Abachelors degree in computer science, computer systems engineering or a related discipline or completion of a college
EDUCATION program in computer science is usually required.
- Amasters or doctoral degree in artificial intelligence (Al), data science or a related field is usually preferred.
EXPERIENCE - Experience in artificial intelligence and ethics is usually preferred.
--- Page 32 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence (Al) Risk Analyst
WORK ROLE Artificial Intelligence (Al) Risk Analyst
OCCUPATION CODE Al-RA
Governance, Management and Risk Analysis
SPECIALTY AREA Artificial Intelligence (Al) Governance and Risk Management
GENERAL
JOB
DESCRIPTION
Al Risk Analysts specialize in identifying, evaluating, and mitigating potential risks associated with artificial intelligence (Al)
systems. Their primary goal is to ensure the responsible and ethical development, deployment, and use of Al technologies.
AI-RA-T01 Ensure artificial intelligence (Al) risks are identified and managed appropriately through the organizations risk
governance process.
Al-RA-T02 Support the Al governance process over the Al inventory, issue tracking, governance meetings  management
reporting.
Al-RA-T03 Carry out an Al risk assessment.
Al-RA-T04 Use continuous monitoring tools to assess risk on an ongoing basis.
AI-RA-T05 Work with organizational officials to ensure continuous monitoring tool data provides situation awareness of risk
levels.
AI-RA-T06 Regularly monitor Al systems in production to detect and address any emerging risks or issues.
AI-RA-T07 Perform risk analysis whenever an application or system undergoes a major change.
Al-RA-T08 Conduct an initial risk assessment of stakeholder assets and update the risk assessment on an ongoing basis.
Al-RA-TO9 Provide input to the risk management framework and related documentation.
AI-RA-T10 Ensure that decisions relating to Al are based on sound risk management principles.
Al-RA-T11 Develop methods to effectively monitor and measure risk, compliance and assurance efforts.
Al-RA-T12 Develop risk mitigation strategies to effectively manage risk in accordance with organizational risk appetite.
Al-RA-T13 Devise strategies and protocols to minimize risks associated with Al, including developing robust testing
methods and risk management frameworks.
Al-RA-T14 Contribute to development of the Al risk management program through independent learning, on job
experience and collaboration with the team, Al application owners and other lines.
Al-RA-T15 Stay updated with regulations and standards related to Al ethics and ensuring that Al systems comply with
these guidelines.
AI-RA-T16 Work with others to implement and maintain a Al risk management program.
Al-RA-T17 Cultivate relationships and channels of communication across all teams to build risk culture, promote Al risk
management, share in best practices and provide independent perspective on initiatives and issues related to
Al applications.
AI-RA-T18 Educate stakeholders and the public about Al risks, advocating for responsible Al practices, and contributing
to the development of Al governance frameworks.
--- Page 33 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
AI-RA-S01 Skill in performing artificial intelligence (Al) AI-RA-SO9 Skill in communicating with others on the
SKILLS . .
related impact and risk assessments. required tasks assigned.
AI-RA-S02 Skill in using risk scoring to inform AI-RA-S10 Skill in using of critical thinking and problem
performance-based and cost-effective solving skills.
approaches to help an organization manage AI-RA-S11 Skill in working with stakeholders to identify
its artificial intelligence risk. Al risks.
AI-RA-SO3 Skill in identifying potential risks inherent in AI-RA-S12 Skill in collaborating with domain experts to
Al systems, such as biases, safety concerns, understand requirements and define project
security vulnerabilities, or ethical implications. objectives.
Al-RA-S04 Skill in assessing the Al risks. Al-RA-S13 Skill in project management and delivery
Skill in working with consequential or complex methodologies such as agile approach. 84-505 -ام
risks. AI-RA-S14 Skill in communicating risks  Al concepts to
Skill in applying different risk methodologies non-technical audiences. 884-506 -ام
in proportion to the risk. AI-RA-S15 Skill in evaluating the Al best practices and
Skill in assessing Al solutions computation adopting the most suitable ones. 88-507 -ام
requirements to estimate of compute AI-RA-S16 Skill in building and maintaining relationships
resources. with external Al organizations, partners, and
AI-RA-S08 Skill in using best practices and tools to test, communities.
deploy, manage, and monitor Al models, AI-RA-S17 Skill in educating and raising awareness of Al
systems and risks. risks.
Al-RA-K01 Knowledge of relevant artificial intelligence Al-RA-K07 Knowledge of the national Al and data
KNOWLEDGE (Al) aspects of legislative and regulatory regulations and requirements relevant to the
requirements, relating to ethics and privacy. organization.
Al-RA-K02 Knowledge and understanding of risk Al-RA-K08 Knowledge of data classification standards
assessment, mitigation and management and methodologies as they relate to the
methods. management of Al risk.
Al-RA-K03 Knowledge of the principles of Al and risk AI-RA-KO9 Knowledge  application of privacy, security
management. compliance,  ethical Al approaches
Al-RA-K04 Knowledge of business practices within Al-RA-K10 Knowledge of privacy and ethical Al
organizations. approaches.
Al-RA-K05 Knowledge of the Core Al disciplines such 5 Al-RA-K11 Knowledge of risk scoring as part of a risk
CV, NLP, Deep Learning. management process.
Al-RA-K06 Knowledge of best practices for supply
chain risk management.
33
--- Page 34 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-RA-A01 Ability to work with the organizations Al-RA-A05 Ability to implement supply chain risk
ABILITIES leadership to provide a comprehensive, management standards.
organization - wide approach to address AI-RA-A06 Ability to apply techniques and tools for
artificial intelligence (Al) risk. detecting risks Al.
AI-RA-A02 Ability to work with the organizations Al-RA-A07 Ability to comply with local and global data
leadership to share Al risk related governance regulations
information. AI-RA-A08 Ability to work independently with minimal
Al-RA-AO3 Ability to work with the organizations supervision.
leadership to provide oversight for all Al risk Al-RA-A09 Ability to challenge and influence ina
management related activities. collaborative way.
Al-RA-A04 Ability to work with the organizations
leadership to determine the organizations
risk posture based on the aggregated risk
from its operations and its use of systems.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, computer systems engineering or a related discipline or completion of a college
EDUCATION program in computer science is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in machine learning, data science, or a related quantitative field is usually preferred.
EXPERIENCE - Experience in artificial intelligence  managing risks techniques and methodologies is usually required.
--- Page 35 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Management Specialist
WORK ROLE Data Management Specialist
OCCUPATION CODE D-MS
Governance, Management and Risk Analysis
SPECIALTY AREA Data Governance and Management
Coordinating, researching, and providing technical support in the field of data structuring and data integration
GENERAL encompasses various key responsibilities. This includes integrating descriptive data, managing and ensuring the
JOB controlled delivery of data, and capturing and modeling data requirements along with data definitions and business rules.
This role is crucial for optimizing data utilization, ensuring data quality, and enabling seamless access to information,
DESCRIPTION ultimately contributing to effective decision-making and organizational success.
D-MS-T01 Analyze and plan for anticipated changes in data capacity requirements.
D-MS-T02 Maintain data management systems software.
D-MS-T03 Collaborate with other teams or systems administrators to maintain information exchanges through publish,
subscribe, and alert functions that enable users to send and receive critical information as required.
D-MS-T04 Manage the compilation, cataloging, caching, distribution, and retrieval of data.
D-MS-T05 Monitor and maintain data management to ensure optimal performance.
D-MS-T06 Implement data management standards, requirements, and specifications.
D-MS-S01 Skill in conducting queries to analyze data D-MS-S03  Skill in maintaining data management. (i.e.,
SKILLS structures. backup, restore, delete data, transaction log
D-MS-S02 Skill in generating queries and reports. ills, Ste).
D-MS-S04  Skill in optimizing data management
performance.
D-MS-K01 Knowledge the foundations of computer D-MS-K06 Knowledge of data management systems,
KNOWLEDGE networking concepts  protocols,  network query languages, table relationships,  views.
security methodologies. D-MS-K07 Knowledge of digital rights management.
D-MS-K02. Knowledge of risk management processes D-MS-K08 Knowledge of policy-based  risk adaptive
(e.g., methods for assessing  mitigating access controls.
risk). D-MS-K09 Knowledge of query systems.
D-MS-K03 Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies, D-MS-K10 Knowledge of sources, characteristics,  uses
and ethics as they relate to data and privacy. of the organizations data assets.
D-MS-K04 Knowledge of data administration and data D-MS-K11 Knowledge of the basics of database access
standardization policies. application programming interfaces (e.g.,
D-MS-K05 Knowledge of data mining  data warehousing Java Database Connectivity JDBC)).
principles. D-MS-K12 Knowledge of database theory.
--- Page 36 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-MS-A01 Ability to maintain data management. (i.e., D-MS-A02 Ability to multi-task, collaborate with peers,
ABILITIES backup, restore, delete data, transaction log customers, and management to accomplish
files, etc.). a variety of different tasks in a constantly
changing environment.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, statistics, business information systems, information management or a related
discipline is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in data science, economics, information management (if curricula contain data
management) or a related field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
EXPERIENCE - Experience in data management techniques and methodologies is usually required.
--- Page 37 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Quality Analyst
WORK ROLE Data Quality Analyst
OCCUPATION CODE D-QA
Governance, Management and Risk Analysis
SPECIALTY AREA Data Governance and Management
GENERAL A Data Quality Analyst is responsible for ensuring that data is accurate, complete, and consistent. They develop and
implement data quality standards and processes to ensure that data is clean and reliable. Data quality analysts work
JOB closely with data analysts to identify and resolve data quality issues, and they may also work with Data governance teams
DESCRIPTION to develop policies and procedures for Data management.
D-QA-T01 Develop and implementing data quality standards and processes.
D-QA-T02 Collaborate with data management teams and business analysts to identify and define critical data
D-QA-T03 Conduct data quality assessments to identify issues.
D-QA-T04 Work to evaluate the impact resulting from data quality challenges
D-QA-T05 Work with Data governance teams to develop policies and procedures for data management.
D-QA-T06 Carry out analysis techniques for data inspection, exploration and visualization
D-QA-T07 Develop and implementing data quality metrics to measure the effectiveness of data quality processes.
D-QA-T08 Collaborate with data analysts to identify and resolve data quality issues.
D-QA-T09 Ensur compliance with data Privacy regulations.
D-QA-S01 Skills in building business-specific standards D-QA-S05 Skill in communicating  collaborating with
SKILLS
and common data models. other data teams.
D-QA-S02 Skill in designing a data analysis structure D-QA-S06 Skill in utilizing data governance frameworks
(i.e., the types of data a test must generate and privacy tools.
and how to analyze that data). D-QA-S07 Skill in applying master data management
D-QA-S03 Skill in conducting data quality assessments models  privacy principles to organizational
using statistics, data visualization, exploratory requirements (relevant to confidentiality,
levis cimehiyets, camel eine iiehy elevate. integrity, availability, authentication,
D-QA-S04 Skill in structured query language and data non-repudiation).
collection and presentation tools.
--- Page 38 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-QA-K01 Knowledge of risk management processes D-QA-K04 Knowledge of data and privacy principles
KNOWLEDGE (e.g., methods for assessing and mitigating and organizational requirements (relevant
risk). to confidentiality, integrity, availability,
D-QA-K02 Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies, authentication, non-repudiation).
and ethics as they relate to data governance, D-QA-K05 Knowledge of the data maturity assessment
compliance and privacy. models and metrics.
D-QA-K03 Knowledge of organizations data schemes D-QA-K06 Knowledge of data quality standards and
and validation tools and techniques. processes.
D-QA-K07 Knowledge of the data governance principles.
D-QA-A01 Ability to identify data quality issues. D-QA-A05 Ability to apply data and privacy principles
ABILITIES D-QA-A02 Ability to analyze data quality issues. to organizational requirements (relevant
D-QA-A03 Ability to collect, verify, and validate test to confidentiality, integrity, availability,
data. authentication, non-repudiation).
D-QA-A04 Ability to translate data and test results into D-QA-A06 Ability to multi-task, collaborate with peers,
evaluative conclusions. customers, and management to accomplish
a variety of different tasks in a constantly
changing environment.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, information technology , cybersecurity, managment information systems, or a
related discipline is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in data science, economics, information technology (if curricula contain data quality) or a
related field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
- Experience in data quality assurance techniques and methodologies is usually required.
--- Page 39 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Stewardship Specialist
WORK ROLE Data Stewardship Specialist
OCCUPATION CODE D-SS
Governance, Management and Risk Analysis
SPECIALTY AREA Data Governance and Management
A data stewardship specialists are accountable for data assets and resources from a strategic perspective. They are
GENERAL responsible for ensuring that the data acquisition, entry, quality, interoperability, and overall management supports the
JOB needs of consumers, citizens, enterprises, organizations, or governments, while also ensuring adherence to social license,
legislative, and regulatory requirements. They work with stakeholders and other deliberative or advisory bodies to develop
DESCRIPTION definitions, standards, and data controls, and perform key functions in the ideation and implementation of data policies
that are scalable, sustainable, and significant.
D-SS-T01 Develop an understanding of customer requirements recommend specific data sources and types to satisfy
mission needs.
D-SS-T02 Identify issues and necessary changes to data systems.
D-SS-T03 Perform data conditioning techniques and processes for data management purposes.
D-SS-T04 Synchronize data from numerous sources develop data taxonomy to support integration into intelligence
products.
D-SS-T05 Nominate and implement data standards and ontology, and actively participates in the development of
standards through working groups.
D-SS-T06 Create and maintain metadata to quality specifications, and ensure data documentation is developed and
maintained.
D-SS-T07 Provide oversight during development of data for visualizationanalytic projects and develop schemas to
ensure the data needs and requirements are documented.
D-SS-T08 Ensure service interoperability and works to develop taxonomies where there are deficiencies in data
standards.
D-SS-T09 Determine requirements to collect data and identify existing data stores, disparate data, or data collection
parameters, and ensures the data collected are consistent with data models to dissolve any data silos.
D-SS-T10 D-SST10. Research data issues and inquiries and implements process for data transformations, to resolve data
issues, collaboration on system changes, and the integrity and quality of data personally createdupdated.
D-SS-T11 Conduct data validation and reconciliation processes following completion of data movement, and enforces
processes for data quality issue resolution
D-SS-T12 Ensure versions of data are maintained along with the history of changes, so that data content and changes can
be audited.
D-SS-T13 Collaborate with data scientists to apply data science principles to dataset interoperability.
--- Page 40 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-SS-T14 Collaborate with data engineers to employ parallel processing and GPUs andor cloud computing to increase
operational efficiencies of data query and use.
D-SS-T15 Collaborate with data stewards and related teams to implement approved changes.
D-SST16 Understand data standards and extraction specifications along with comprehension of how analysts currently
utilize data and how they might expect to use content in the future.
D-SS-T17 Interrogate, prepare data to deliver results andor deploy automated processes using related programming
languages.
D-SS-T18 Employ organizations data-related software for data analysis and data management.
D-SS-T19 Communicate technically both orally and in writing and to constructively resolve data-related issues by leading
andor working as a member of a team.
D-SS-T20 Evaluate and utilize data services and applications to institute improvements to data content and structure,
metadata, data models, data quality, accessibility and dissemination.
D-SS-T21 Ensure established metadata policies  processes are adhered to for increased integration, access, efficiency,
and discoverability.
D-SS-T22 Build data schemas andor data profiles to enable multiple mission use of data.
D-SS-T23 Apply knowledge of databases, data file formats, commercial imagery data, digital image processing
techniques, and organizations data-related software.
055-501 Skill in designing, implementing, monitoring, D-SS-S04 Skill in analyzing data, andor reconciling
SKILLS andor maintaining databases. differences and redundancies to ensure
D-Ss-s02 Skill in developing data set processes for consistency.
data discovery, modeling, mining, andor D-S88-805 Skill in a variety of computing languages and
production. tools e.g., scripting languages.
Skill in acquiring, validating, integrating, Skill in data tools in the extraction and
D-SS-S03 andor maintaining data within databases. D-SS-S06  attribution, preparation, management andor
analysis of spatial data.
D-SS-K01 Knowledge of data extraction, final product D-SS-K05 Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies,
KNOWLEDGE and metadata specifications. and ethics as they relate to cybersecurity
D-SS-K02 Knowledge of integrating data from various and privacy.
sources and ensuring compatibility and D-SS-K06 Knowledge of data protection laws, industry
smooth interaction between different regulations, and compliance standards
systems. related to data handling and privacy.
D-SS-K03 Knowledge of exploratory and confirmatory D-SS-K07 Knowledge of the fundamental principles
data analysis. and practices of data governance, including
D-SS-K04 Knowledge of risk management processes data ownership, accountability, and policies.
(e.g., methods for assessing  mitigating risk).
--- Page 41 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-SS-A01 Ability to communicate complex information, D-SS-A06 Ability to focus research efforts to meet the
ABILITIES concepts, or ideas in a confident and customers decision-making needs.
well-organized manner through verbal, written, D-SS-A07 Ability to function effectively in a dynamic,
andor visual means. fast-paced environment.
D-SS-A02 Ability to develop or recommend analytic D-SS-A08 Ability to function in a  collaborative
approaches or solutions to problems and environment, seeking continuous consultation
situations for which information is incomplete with other analysts and expertsboth internal
or for which no precedent exists. and external to the organizationto leverage
D-SS-A03 Ability to evaluate information for reliability, analytical and technical expertise.
validity, and relevance. Ability to think critically.
D-SS-A04 Ability to evaluate, analyze, and synthesize D-SS-A09 Ability to understand objectives and effects.
large quantities of data (which may be D-SS-A10 Ability to multi-task, collaborate with peers,
fragmented  contradictory) into high quality, D-SS-A11 customers, and management to accomplish a
fused targetingintelligence products. variety of different tasks in a constantly
D-SS-A05 Ability to exercise judgment when policies are changing environment.
not well-defined.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, statistics, information technology, software engineering, managment information
systems, applied mathematics, or a related discipline is usually required.
- Amasters or doctoral degree in data science, economics, information technology (if curricula contain data stewardship) or a
related field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
- Experience in data stewardship techniques and methodologies is usually required.
--- Page 42 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Governance Analyst
WORK ROLE Data Governance Analyst
OCCUPATION CODE D-GA
Governance, Management and Risk Analysis
Data Governance and Management
Coordinating, researching, and providing support in data governance efforts, framing workflow procedures, policy
GENERAL development, and monitoring with representatives and data experts in the business. Ensuring awareness dissemination
JOB and employee training in data management areas, as well as elevating data management and governance maturity levels.
DESCRIPTION Analyzes datainformation from one or multiple sources to conduct preparation of the environment, respond to requests
for information, and submit intelligence collection and production requirements in support of planning and operations.
D-GA-T01 Assist in the coordination, validation, and management of all-source collection requirements, plans, andor
activities.
D-GA-T02 Maintain information exchanges through publish, subscribe, and alert functions that enable users to send and
receive critical information as required.
D-GA-T03 Coordinate with cybersecurity teams to maintain awareness of internal  external cyber organization structures,
strengths, and employments of staffing and technology.
D-GA-T04 Implement data management standards, requirements, and specifications.
D-GA-T05 Evaluate threat decision-making processes.
D-GA-T06 Identify threat vulnerabilities and how to protect the data (eg. laws and regulations..etc).
D-GA-T07 Create requests for information and share data with relevant parties.
D-GA-T08 Identify threat tactics and methodologies that are relevant to the data use.
D-GA-T09 Ildentify and evaluate threat critical capabilities, requirements, and vulnerabilities that are relevant to the data
use.
D-GA-T10 Provide analyses and support for effectiveness assessment.
D-GA-T11 Provide current intelligence support to critical internalexternal stakeholders as appropriate.
D-GA-S01 Skill in developing or recommending analytic D-GA-S05 Skill in assessing a variety of data analytics
SKILLS approaches or solutions to problems and techniques (such as data mining and
prescriptive and predictive analytics) for
complex data analysis through the whole
or for which no precedent exists. data life cycle.
situations for which information is incomplete
D-GA-S02 Skill in generating queries and reports.
D-GA-S03 Skill in evaluating information for reliability, D-GA-S06 Skill in writing, reviewing and editing data
validity, and relevance governance procedures and policies.
D-GA-S04 Skill in tailoring analysis to the necessary D-GA-S07 Communication and presentation skills.
levels (e.g., classification  organizational).
--- Page 43 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-GA-K01 Knowledge of information extraction. D-GA-K05 Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies,
KNOWLEDGE a . 1
D-GA-K02 Knowledge of digital rights management. and ethics as they relate to cybersecurity
D-GA-K03 Knowledge of exploratory and confirmatory and privacy.
data analysis. D-GA-K06 Knowledge of data and privacy principles.
D-GA-K04 Knowledge of risk management processes
(e.g., methods for assessing  mitigating risk).
D-GA-A01 Ability to communicate complex information, D-GA-A04 Ability to evaluate, analyze, and synthesize
ABILITIES concepts, or ideas in a confident and large quantities of data (which may be
well-organized manner through verbal, fragmented  contradictory) into high quality,
written, andor visual means. fused targetingintelligence products.
D-GA-A02 Ability to collaborate with data engineers D-GA-A05 Ability to function effectively in a dynamic,
analytics teams to develop or recommend fast-paced environment.
analytic approaches or solutions to problems D-GA-A06 Ability to think critically.
and situations for which information is D-GA-A07 Ability to think like threat actors.
incomplete or for which no precedent exists. D-GA-A08 Ability to understand objectives and effects.
D-GA-A03 Ability to evaluate information for reliability, D-GA-Aog Ability to multi-task, collaborate with peers,
validity, and relevance. customers, and management to accomplish
a variety of different tasks in a constantly
changing environment.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, law, mathematics, managment information systems, or a related discipline is
usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in data science, economics, information technology (if curricula contain data manament)
or a related field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
EXPERIENCE - Experience in data governance techniques and methodologies is usually required.
--- Page 44 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
5.3 Date Science and Analytics Category
Data Analyst
WORK ROLE Data Analyst
OCCUPATION CODE D-An
Data Science and Analytics
SPECIALTY AREA Data Analytics and Business Intelligence
GENERAL Examines data from multiple disparate sources with the goal of providing security and privacy insight. Designs and
JOB implements custom algorithms, workflow processes, and layouts for complex, enterprise-scale data sets used for
modeling, data mining, and research purposes. A data analyst collects, organizes and studies data to provide business
DESCRIPTION insight.
D-An-T01 Analyze and define data needs, including current requirements and specification as well as plan with the DBA
for future capacity demands.
D-An-T02 Support data governancequality teams to develop data standards, policies, and procedures.
D-An-T03 Collaborate with data engineers to manage the compilation, cataloging, caching, distribution, and retrieval of
data including managed flow of relevant information (via web-based portals or other means) based on mission
requirements.
D-An-T04 Provide recommendations on new data management technologies and architectures.
D-An-T05 Analyze data sources to provide actionable recommendations.
D-An-T06 Assess the validity of source data and subsequent findings.
D-An-T07 Collect metrics and trending data.
D-An-T08 Apply analytical methods including exploratory data analysis and statistical testings for data inspection,
exploration and visualisation.
D-An-T09 Confer with systems analysts, engineers, programmers, and others to design application.
D-An-T10 Identify, collect, and preprocess data from various sources to prepare it for analysis.
D-An-T11 Apply appropriate statistical techniques to available data to discover new relations and offer insights, helping
to improve organizational processes and support decision making.
D-An-T12 Utilize open source tools to deal with data files  apply quantitative techniques (e.g., descriptive and inferential
statistics, sampling, experimental design, parametric and non-parametric tests of difference, ordinary least
squares regression, general line).
--- Page 45 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-An-S01 Skill in conducting queries and developing D-An-S07 Skill in developing machine understandable
SEES algorithms to analyze data structures. semantic ontologies.
D-An-S02 Skill in creating and utilizing mathematical or D-An-S08 Skill in Regression Analysis (e.g., Hierarchical
statistical models. Stepwise, Generalized Linear Model, Ordinary
D-An-S03 Skill in generating queries and reports. Least Squares, Tree-Based Methods,
D-An-S04 Skill in using programming and data tools to Logistic).
collect, preprocess, and analyze data from D-An-S09  Skill in using basic descriptive statistics
various sources. and techniques (e.g., normality, model
D-An-S05 Skill in identifying hidden patterns or distribution, scatter plots).
relationships. D-An-S10 Skill in the use of design modeling (e.g.,
D-An-S06 Skill in performing analytical methods unified modeling language).
including exploratory data analysis, D-An-S11 Skill in data mining techniques (e.g.,
statistical testing, sensitivity analysis, outlier searching file systems) and analysis.
identification and removal techniques. D-An-S12 Skill to identify sources, characteristics, and
uses of the organizations data assets.
D-An-K01 Knowledge of computer networking D-An-K06 Knowledge of sources, characteristics, and
KNOWLEDGE concepts  protocols, and network security uses of the organizations data assets.
methodologies. D-An-K07 Knowledge of the capabilities  functionality
D-An-K02 Knowledge of computer programming associated with various technologies for
principles. organizing and managing information (e.g.,
D-An-K03 Knowledge of data administration and data databases, bookmarking engines).
standardization policies. D-An-K08 Knowledge of advanced data remediation
D-An-K04 Knowledge of data mining and data security features in databases.
warehousing principles. D-An-K09 Knowledge of database access application
D-An-K05 Knowledge of database management programming interfaces.
systems, query languages, table D-An-K10 Knowledge of applications that can log errors,
relationships, and views. exceptions, and application faults  logging.
--- Page 46 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-An-A01 Ability to carry out data quality control, D-An-A06 Ability to use data visualization tools (e.g.,
ABILITIES validation and linkage. Flare, HighCharts, AmCharts, D3.js,
D-An-A02 Ability to produce clear graphical Processing, Google Visualization API,
representations and data visualisations. Tableau, Raphael.js).
D-An-A03 Ability to work with complex data structures D-An-A07 Ability to accurately and completely source
using high-level programming languages. all data used in intelligence, assessment
D-An-A04 Ability to dissect a problem and examine the andor planning products.
interrelationships between data that may D-An-A08 Ability to multi-task, collaborate with peers,
appear unrelated. customers, and management to accomplish
D-An-A05 Ability to identify basic common coding a variety of different tasks in a constantly
flaws at a high level. changing environment.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, statistics, business information systems, information managment or a related
discipline is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in data science, economics, science (if curricula contain data analysis) or a related
quantitative field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
- Experience in data analysis techniques and statistical methodologie is usually required.
--- Page 47 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Scientist
WORK ROLE Data Scientist
OCCUPATION CODE D-S
Data Science and Analytics
SPECIALTY AREA Data Science
GENERAL
JOB
DESCRIPTION
Data scientists use advanced analytics technologies, including machine learning and predictive modelling, to support the
identification of trends, scrape information from unstructured data sources and provide automated recommendations.
D-S-T01 Resolve problems using applied mathematics, statistical methods and probability concepts such as processing
data using descriptive statistics, applying probability concepts in random situations, quantifying relationship
between variables
D-S-T02 Apply analytical methods including exploratory data analysis and statistical testings for data inspection,
exploration and visualisation.
D-S-T03 Solve complex problems by applying tensor-based analysis techniques such as using systems of multi-linear
equations, determining the results of tensor operations.
D-S-T04 Use analytical methods, visualization, and statistical testing to find patterns and draw conclusions.
D-S-TO5 Apply performance metrics and hypothesis testing to ensure model accuracy and effectiveness.
D-S-TO6 Identify, collect, and preprocess data from various sources to prepare it for analysis.
D-S-TO7 Build and evaluate statistical models and machine learning models to derive actionable insights and
predictions.
D-S-T08 Collaborate with ML engineers and MLOps Specialists to deploy machine learning models for various
business-related applications, such as recommendation systems, fraud detection, and demand forecasting.
D-S-T09 Work on data preparation, implement reusable cleaning processes, and utilize diverse data architectures and
tools.
0-5-501آ Skill in mastering statistical methods and D-S-S04  Skill in translating complex statistical output
SKILLS diverse data analytics techniques (data
into clear, actionable insights for diverse
mining, predictiveprescriptive analytics) to
Poe iences.
tackle complex data throughout its lifecycle. Mel Mec
--- Page 48 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-S-S02 Skill in employing various performance and D-S-S05 Skill in developing effective machine learning
accuracy metrics for thorough statistical and statistical models to extract valuable
assessment, model validation,  hypothesis insights from data.
testing. D-S-S06 Skill in comparing selected applied
D-S-S03  Skill in applying analytical methods including mathematics  statistical methods  identify
exploratory data analysis  statistical testing their differences
to a specific data set, to reach accurate and
١ 1 D-S-S07 Skill in leveraging parallel and distributed
reliable conclusions.
computer architecture to handle large
datasets efficiently.
D-S-K0O1 Knowledge of applied  discrete mathematics, D-S-KO6 Knowledge of a broad range of statistical,
KNOWLEDGE and graph theory. mathematical and advanced analytics tools
0-5-1602 Knowledge of statistical paradigms (such that support organization.
as regression, time series, dimensionality, D-S-KO7 Knowledge of probabilistic representations
clusters). (causal networks, Bayesian analysis, Markov
D-S-K03 Knowledge of inferential  predictive statistics. nets)
D-S-K04 Knowledge of information retrieval techniques. D-S-K08 Knowledge of exploratory  confirmatory data
D-S-KO5 Knowledge of advanced analytics techniques analysis.
as well as machine learning  deep learning D-S-KO9 Knowledge of quantitative and qualitative
algorithms. analytics.
D-S-A01 Ability to interpreting statistical output D-S-A04 Ability to explore and confirm data analysis.
ABILITIES effectively and accurately. 0-5-8405 Ability to multi-task, collaborate with peers,
D-S-A02 Ability to applied mathematics and statistics, customers, and management to accomplish
and can use this knowledge to carry out data a variety of different tasks in a constantly
science tasks. changing environment.
D-S-A03 Ability to extract information.
- A bachelors degree in statistics, mathematics, computer science, computer systems engineering or a related discipline
EDUCATION is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in machine learning, data science, or a related quantitative field is usually required.
EXPERIENCE - Experience in programming is usually required.
- Experience in statistical modelling or machine learning is usually required.
--- Page 49 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
5.4 Engineering and Architecture Category
Data Engineer
WORK ROLE Data Engineer
OCCUPATION CODE D-En
Engineering and Architecture
SPECIALTY AREA Data Engineering
GENERAL A data engineer is an IT worker whose primary job is to prepare data for analytical or operational uses. These software
JOB engineers are typically responsible for building data pipelines to bring together information from different source systems.
They integrate, consolidate and cleanse data and structure it for use in analytics applications. They aim to make data easily
DESCRIPTION accessible and to optimize their organizations big data ecosystem.
D-En-T01 Design, implement, and manage data pipelines for acquiring, storing, and transforming large volumes of data.
D-En-T02 Build and maintain data lakes, data warehouses and databases to ensure data availability and reliability.
D-En-T03 Ensure data quality and integrity through data validation and cleaning processes.
D-En-T04 Develop and implement data governance, privacy, and security measures to protect sensitive information.
D-En-T05 Optimize data infrastructure for performance, scalability, and cost efficiency.
D-En-T06 Troubleshoot and resolve issues related to data pipelines and data infrastructure.
D-En-T07 Implement extraction-transformation-loading (ETL) processes and optimize data retrieval.
D-En-T08 Engage in the most complex data challenges and solutions.
D-En-T09 Source system analysis from a complex single or multiple data sources in a conformed model for analysis.
D-En-T10 Design, build and test data products based on feeds from multiple systems, using a range of different storage
technologies, access methods or both.
D-En-T11 Work with metadata repositories to complete complex tasks such as data and systems integration impact
analysis.
D-En-T12 Manage the compilation, cataloging, caching, distribution, and retrieval of data.
D-En-T13 Make dataset for predictive and prescriptive modeling.
D-En-T14 Access to representative features that can describe a model.
D-En-T15 Build data pipelines for different requirments.
--- Page 50 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-En-S01 Skill in designing, coding, testing, correcting D-En-S06 Skill in explaining the types of problems in
اتات  documenting simple-to-complex programs databases, data processes, data products
and scripts from agreed specifications and and services.
subsequent iterations. D-En-S07 Skill in extraction-transformation-loading (ETL)
D-En-S02 Skill in undertaking data profiling  sourcing process.
system analysis. D-En-S08 Skill in identifying technical solutions for
D-En-S03 Skill in maintaining a repository to ensure complex data.
information accuracy and quality. D-En-S09 Skill in designing, building and testing data
D-En-S04 Skill in seting up robust governance and products that are complex or large scale
security processes to keep repositories up to D-En-S10 Skill in data integration methods and
date. frameworks.
D-En-S05 Skill in knowing how to best to optimize data D-En-S11 Skill in producing synthetic data and use it
infrastructure. for data analytics.
D-En-K01 Knowledge of general principles, concepts D-En-K07 Knowledge of data processing models
KNOWLEDGE and practices in Data Management and (batch, steaming, parallel)
organization. D-En-K08 Knowledge of navigating solutions for complex
D-En-K02 Knowledge of data warehousing and data data.
mining. D-En-KO09 Knowledge of big data solutions for large
D-En-K03 Knowledge of main concepts in data scale data processing.
processing (such as data cleaning, data D-En-K10 Knowledge of large and ultra-large scale
validation, data verification and data software systems organization  warehouse
transformation). platforms.
D-En-K04 Knowledge of data security and protection. D-En-K11 Knowledge of metadata registries, publishing
D-En-K05 Knowledge of infrastructure and platforms metadata, and systems integration.
for data science applications. D-En-K12 Knowledge of computer networking concepts
D-En-K06 Knowledge of data Infrastructure: services and protocols, and network security
and components, including data storage methodologies.
infrastructure.
--- Page 51 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-En-A01 Ability to deal with complex technical D-En-A04 Ability to dissect a problem and examine the
ABILITIES problem. interrelationships between data that may
D-En-A02 Ability to work with one of the well-known appear unrelated.
big data analytics platforms and tools (such D-En-A05 Ability to use and understand complex
as Hadoop, Spark, and cloud based big data mathematical concepts (e.g., discrete math).
services). D-En-A06 Ability to multi-task, collaborate with peers,
D-En-A03 Ability to build complex data structures and customers, and management of oneself or
high-level programming languages. others to accomplish a variety of different
tasks in a constantly changing environment.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, statistics, software engineering information technology or a related discipline
is usually required.
- Amasters or doctoral degree in data science, machine learning, economics, science (if curricula contain data analysis)
or a related quantitative field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
EXPERIENCE - Experience in data engineering techniques and methodologie is usually required.
--- Page 52 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence (Al) Engineer
WORK ROLE Artificial Intelligence (Al) Engineer
OCCUPATION CODE Al-En
Engineering and Architecture
SPECIALTY AREA Artificial Intelligence (Al) Engineering
GENERAL Al Enginees are responsible for designing, developing, and implementing artificial intelligence and machine learning
JOB solutions. They revolve around creating Al models, algorithms, and applications that can analyze and interpret complex
data to deliver actionable insights and predictions. They collaborate with cross-functional teams, including data scientists,
DESCRIPTION software engineers, and domain experts, to integrate Al capabilities into various products and services.
Al-En-T01 Implement and deploy artificial intelligence (Al) algorithms, including training machine learning (ML) models
such as neural networks, to solve business problems and optimize processes.
Al-En-T02 Develop backend services and APIs to interface with machine learning (ML) models.
Al-En-T03 Build and deploy inference pipelines to productionize ML models.
Al-En-T04 Develop scripts to process structured and unstructured data.
Al-En-T05 Implement natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision techniques to extract insights from
unstructured data sources.
Al-En-T06 Utilize tools and frameworks for data exploration, feature engineering, and model evaluation.
Al-En-T07 Optimize Al models for performance, scalability, and accuracy.
Al-En-T08 Design MLDL systems and infrastructure.
Al-En-T09 Cooperate to integrate Al and ML capabilities into existing applications.
Al-En-T10 Assess, evaluate and validate the model performance bias.
Al-En-T11 Oversee and set-up MLOps (machine learning operations) pipelines required for the delivery of artificial
intelligence services on the platform.
Al-En-T12 Determine scheduling of compute resources and inference schedules based on prediction requirements (batch
vs real time inferences vs offline, etc.).
Al-En-T13 Monitor the performance of deployed models and watch for concept drifting.
--- Page 53 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-En-S01 Skill in training machine learning (ML) Al-En-S10 Skill in identifying artificial intelligence solutions
Shas algorithms to obtain an ML model. computation requirements to define needed
Al-En-S02 Skill in a high-level programming language. compute resources.
Al-En-S03 Skill in turning ML models into APIs ina Al-En-S11 Skill in using best practices and tools to test,
high-level programming language. deploy, manage, and monitor ML models in
Al-En-S04 Skill in preprocessing and cleaning large real-world production (ex. MLOps tools).
datasets to ensure data quality and prepare Al-En-S12 Skill in using of critical thinking and problem
them for analysis. solving skills to scale and productionize ML
Al-En-S05 Skill in the core artificial intelligence (Al) models.
disciplines such as computer vision (CV), Al-En-S13 Skill in working with stakeholders to identify
natural language processing (NLP), deep opportunities to solve business problems.
ing (DL).
earning (DL) Al-En-S14 Skill in communicating clearly with seniors
Al-En-S06 Skill in ensuring continuous improvement of and fellow analysts on the required tasks
Al models by reviewing and validating the assigned.
model monitoring capabilities and model Al-En-S15 Skill in collaborating with data scientists and
retraining workflows. domain experts to understand requirements
Al-En-S07 Skill in ensuring continuous improvement of and define project objectives.
artificial intelligence (Al) models by reviewing a 1 ١
Al-En-S16 Skill in project management and delivery
validating the model monitoring 1 1
methodologies such as agile approach.
capabilities and model retraining workflows.
Al-En-S08 Skill in when to apply which ML algorithm  Al-En-S17 Skill in communicating machine learning and
select the most appropriate ML model for artificial intelligence concepts to non-technical
the data at hand. audiences.
Al-En-S09 Skill in using Machine Learning Operations Al-En-S18 Skill in fine-tuning  prompt engineering to
(ML.Ops) concepts  tools to monitor, optimize, adapt a genera-purpose large language
improve  deploy Al-enabled solutioris. model (LIM).
--- Page 54 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-En-K01 Knowledge of core ML algorithms and Al-En-K06 Knowledge in ML architecture (ex. framing
KNOWLEDGE modelling and data science workflows. and architect ML solutions).
Al-En-K02 Knowledge of data science workflows for Al-En-K07 Knowledge of communication and teamwork
structured and unstructured data bases. skills.
Al-En-K03 Knowledge of the Core Al disciplines such as Al-En-K08 Knowledge  application of privacy, security
CV, NLP, Deep Learning. compliance, and ethical Al approaches in ML
Al-En-K04 Knowledge of planning, design, testing, and system design.
monitoring of various aspects of the Al Al-En-K09 Knowledge of application of agile delivery
system, such as data, architecture, methodologies and concepts.
infrastructure, and algorithms. Al-En-K11 Knowledge of coaching and mentoring best
Al-En-K05 Knowledge of the artificial intelligence practices.
solutions requirements to contribute to the Al-En-K12 Knowledge of privacy and ethical artificial
definition of production plans, deployment intelligence approaches in ML system design.
requirements  frameworks, tools, software, Al-En-K13 Knowledge of the basic concepts, issues
hardware, virtualization, and scheduling of and risks related to artificial intelligence and
compute resources. its organizational impact.
Al-En-A01 Ability to package  deploy digital solutions. Al-En-A06 Ability to identify dataset size and storage
ABILITIES Al-En-A02 Ability to apply critical thinking. requirements to cater for computing capacity
Al-En-A03 Ability to code high  low level object oriented and model scaling requirements as part of
programming languages to a mature level. the ML system design.
Al-En-A04 Ability to understand structured and Al-En-A07 Ability to identify Al solutions requirements
unstructured data bases. to contribute to the scheduling of compute
Al-En-A05 Ability to work with application development resources.
languages, tools, and frameworks. Al-En-A08 Ability to comply with local and global data
governance regulations.
Al-En-A09 Ability to develop ideas from concept to
product.
- Abachelors degree in computer science, computer systems engineering or a related discipline or completion of a college
EDUCATION program in computer science is usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in machine learning, data science, or a related quantitative field is usually required.
- Progression to software engineer is possible with experience.
- Experience in statistical modelling or machine learning is usually required.
EXPERIENCE
--- Page 55 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Architect
WORK ROLE Data Architect
OCCUPATION CODE D-Ar
Engineering and Architecture
SPECIALTY AREA Data and Artificial Intelligence (Al) Architecture
A Data Architect is responsible for designing and implementing an organizations data Architecture, including data models,
GENERAL data integration, data storage, and Data management systems. They work closely with business stakeholders and IT
JOB teams to ensure that data solutions align with business objectives and comply with regulatory requirements. They set the
DESCRIPTION vision for the organizations use of data, through data design, to ensure that data is managed properly and meets the
organizations needs.
D-Ar-T01 Design data architecture that effectively addresses specific business problems while adhering to enterprise-
wide standards and principles.
D-Ar-T02 Design  implement data models  integration solutions as well as applications that ensure accuracy, reliability,
and scalability.
D-Ar-T03 Develop data storage  management strategies that enable efficient access, analysis, and governance of large
datasets.
D-Ar-T04 Ensure that acquired or developed system(s)  architecture(s) are consistent with organizations data architecture
guidelines.
D-Ar-T05 Identify and prioritize critical business functions in collaboration with organizational stakeholders.
D-Ar-T06 Collaborate with business stakeholders and IT teams to understand business requirements and design data
solutions accordingly.
D-Ar-T07 Collaborate with data scientists and software engineers to develop and deploy data-related solutions.
D-Ar-T08 Design data architectures that integrate security principles and align with security policies, ensuring data
confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
D-Ar-TO9 Evaluate and select data management tools and technologies.
D-Ar-T10 Evaluate data  security architectures  designs to determine the adequacy of security design  architecture
proposed or provided in response to requirements contained in acquisition documents.
D-Ar-T11 Undertake data profiling and source system analysis.
D-Ar-T12 Present clear insights to colleagues to support the end use of the data.
D-Ar-T13 Take responsibility for the assurance of data solutions and make recommendations to ensure compliance.
D-Ar-T14 Document and update as necessary all definition and data architecture activities.
D-Ar-T15 Document how the implementation of a new system or new interface between systems impacts the current and
target environment including but not limited to security posture.
D-Ar-T16 Produce, maintain and update relevant data models for an organisations specific needs.
D-Ar-T17 Extract and document data models from existing systems.
D-Ar-T18 Analyze where data standards have been applied or breached, and undertake an impact analysis of that breach.
D-Ar-T19 Work with metadata repositories to complete complex tasks such as data  systems integration impact analysis.
--- Page 56 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-Ar-S01 Skill to apply data and privacy principles to D-Ar-S07 Skill in developing data standards for
organizational requirements (relevant a specific component.
to confidentiality, integrity, availability, D-Ar-S08 Skill in maintaining a repository to ensure
authentication, non-repudiation). information remains accurate and up to date.
D-Ar-S02 Skill in design modeling and building use D-Ar-S09 Skill to identify data and privacy issues that
cases (e.g., unified modeling language). stem from connections with internal and
D-Ar-SO3 Skill in designing  analyzing data systems, external customers  partner organizations.
including their resilience, dependability, and
response to changes in conditions, operations,
and the environment.
D-Ar-S10 Skill in applying and incorporating
information technologies into proposed
solutions.
D-Ar-S04 Skill in communicating effectively with
technical and non-technical stakeholders. D-Ar-S11 Skill in determining the appropriate remedy
D-Ar-S05 Skill in supporting  hosting discussions within and assist with its implementation.
a multidisciplinary team, with potentially
difficult dynamics.
D-Ar-SO6 Skill in being an advocate for the team
externally, and can manage differing
perspectives.
D-Ar-S12 Skill in determining preventive measures.
D-Ar-KO1 Knowledge of various types of data D-Ar-K10 Knowledge of key concepts in security and
KNOWLEDGE architectures. data management.
D-Ar-K02 Knowledge of data modeling and integration D-Ar-K11 Knowledge of data architecture tools,
techniques. methods, and techniques.
D-Ar-K03 Knowledge of the enterprise information D-Ar-K12 Knowledge of software engineering.
technology (IT) architectural concepts and D-Ar-K13 Knowledge of data storage  management
patterns (e.g., baseline, validated design, principles, models, methods, and systems.
and target architectures.) D-Ar-K14 Knowledge of organizational process
D-Ar-K04 Knowledge of risk management processes improvement concepts and process maturity
related to data security, privacy,  governance. models.
(e.g., methods for assessing and mitigating D-Ar-K15 Knowledge of service management
risk). concepts for data and related standards.
D-Ar-K05 Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies, D-Ar-K16 Knowledge of confidentiality, integrity, and
and ethics as they relate to data and privacy. availability requirements.
D-Ar-KO6 Knowledge of data and privacy principles. D-Ar-K17 Knowledge of data-enabled solutions.
D-Ar-KO7 Knowledge of database design  database D-Ar-K18 Knowledge of data analysis and visualization
programming. tools.
D-Ar-K08 Knowledge of organizations enterprise D-Ar-K19 Knowledge of cloud computing and big data
information security architecture. technologies.
D-Ar-KO9 Knowledge of data and privacy principles D-Ar-K20 Knowledge of an organizations information
and organizational requirements (relevant classification program and procedures data
to confidentiality, integrity, availability, breach.
authentication, non-repudiation).
--- Page 57 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-Ar-A01 Ability to apply the methods, standards, and D-Ar-A07 Ability to design and implements data
ABILITIES approaches for describing, analyzing, and governance frameworks to ensure data
documenting an organizations enterprise integrity, security, and compliance.
data architecture. D-Ar-A08 Ability to share expertise in writing and
D-Ar-A02 Ability to apply an organizations goals and verbally with other members of the team.
objectives to develop and maintain data D-Ar-A09 Ability to develop cutting-edge systems and
architecture. use them in a creative way.
D-Ar-A03 Ability to design and optimize systems to D-Ar-A10 Ability to perform outstanding maths
meet enterprise performance requirements. activates, strong analytical and problem-
D-Ar-A04 Ability to execute technology integration solving techniques.
processes. D-Ar-A11 Ability to write a high-level of programming
D-Ar-A05 Ability to build data architectures  frameworks. language, adapt new scripting languages,
D-Ar-A06 Ability to apply data and privacy principles understand the requirements  constraints
to organizational requirements (relevant of software products  services on different
to confidentiality, integrity, availability, platforms including intelligent one(s).
authentication, non-repudiation). D-Ar-A12 Ability to create basic visuals  presentations.
- A bachelors degree in computer science, statistics, mathematics, software engineering or related field is usually required.
- Amasters or doctoral degree in statistics, data science, or a related quantitative field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
- Experience in enterprise data architecture is usually required.
--- Page 58 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Modeler Associate
WORK ROLE Data Modeler Associate
OCCUPATION CODE D-Ma
Engineering and Architecture
SPECIALTY AREA Data  Artificial Intelligence (Al) Architect
Data Modellers are responsible for designing, creating, and maintaining the data models used by an organization (using
GENERAL relational, dimensional, and NoSQL databases). Data models are used to represent the data structures and relationships
JOB within a database or an information system. The Data Modeller works closely with the business stakeholders to understand
DESCRIPTION their requirements and translate them into a data model that meets their needs. The Data Modeller also ensures that the
data model is scalable, efficient, and easy to maintain.
D-Ma-T01 Perform data profilinganalysis activities that helps to establish, modify, and maintain data model.
D-Ma-T02 Apply data analysis, design, modelling,  quality assurance techniques, based upon a detailed understanding
of business processes, to establish, modify or maintain data structures and associated components (entity
descriptions, relationship descriptions, attribute definitions).
D-Ma-T03 Ensure and enforce a governance process to oversee implementation activities and ensure alignment to the
defined architecture.
D-Ma-T04 Help the business in identifying how data supports business processes and how to model those needs.
D-Ma-T05 Liaise with stakeholders in building trust in the data being used for decision making.
D-Ma-T06 Work closely with data architects to develop bespoke databases utilizing a mixture of conceptual, physical, and
logical models.
D-Ma-T07 Work with key business representatives, data owners, end users, application designers and data architects to
design current and future state data model.
D-Ma-S01 Skill in designing and creating data models. D-Ma-S09 Skill in communicating the details of data
SKILLS D-Ma-S02 Skill in maintaining  updating data models. structures  associated components to
D-Ma-S03 Skill in ensuring data models are scalable, others using the data structures and
efficient, and easy to maintain. associated components.
D-Ma-S04 Skill in translating business requirements D-Ma-S10 Skill in creating and utilizing mathematical or
into data models. statistical models.
--- Page 59 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
SKILLS D-Ma-S05 Skill in identifying and resolving data-related D-Ma-S11 Skill in developing data dictionaries.
issues. D-Ma-S12 Skill in developing data models, design
D-Ma-S06 Skill in working with data modelling tools and modeling (e.g., unified modeling language).
industry standard techniques to capture and D-Ma-S13 Skill in data mining techniques (e.g.,
document data artefacts  be knowledgeable searching file systems) and analysis.
on topics such as data lineage, data usage D-Ma-S14 Skill in identifying hidden patterns or
and data structures. relationships.
D-Ma-S07 Skill in applying standard data modelling and D-Ma-S15 Skill in data modeling  data mapping tools.
designing techniques based upon a detailed D-Ma-S16 Skill to identify sources, characteristics, and
understanding of requirements. uses of the organizations data assets.
D-Ma-S08 Skill in establishing, modifying,  maintaining D-Ma-S17 Skill in generating queries and reports.
data structures and associated components. D-Ma-S18 Skill in communicating effectively with
technical and non-technical stakeholders.
D-Ma-K01 Knowledge of data modeling concepts and D-Ma-K11 Knowledge of programming language
KNOWLEDGE integration techniques. structures and logic.
D-Ma-K02 Knowledge of data management areas D-Ma-K12 Knowledge of sources, characteristics, and
including data architecture, data modelling uses of the organizations data assets.
and design, data quality, reference and D-Ma-K13 Knowledge of the capabilities  functionality
master data, and metadata. associated with various technologies for
D-Ma-K03 Knowledge of using basic descriptive organizing and managing information (e.g.,
statistics and techniques (e.g., normality, databases, bookmarking engines).
model distribution, scatter plots). D-Ma-K14 Knowledge of laws, regulations, policies,
D-Ma-K04 Knowledge of data modeling tools such as and ethics as they relate to data, privacy, and
ERwin, ERStudio, or PowerDesigner. cybersecurity.
D-Ma-K05 Knowledge of data management best D-Ma-K15 Knowledge of risk management processes
practices. (e.g., methods for assessing and mitigating
D-Ma-K06 Knowledge of database management risk).
systems, query languages, table D-Ma-K16 Knowledge of machine learning theory and
relationships, and views. principles.
D-Ma-K07 Knowledge of query languages such as SQL D-Ma-K17 Knowledge of database theory.
(structured query language). D-Ma-K18 Knowledge of Information Theory (e.g.,
D-Ma-K08 Knowledge of data migration planning and source coding, channel coding, algorithm
implementation. complexity theory, and data compression).
D-Ma-K09 Knowledge of data mining and data D-Ma-K19 Knowledge of machine learning theory and
warehousing principles. principles.
D-Ma-K10 Knowledge of digital rights management.
--- Page 60 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
D-Ma-A01 Ability to interface with, and gain the respect D-Ma-A08 Ability to analyze large amounts of detailed
ABILITIES of, stakeholders at all levels and roles within information, quickly understand complex
the company. issues, and break information down into
D-Ma-A02 Ability to prioritize and use initiative. smaller, more manageable pieces.
D-Ma-A03 Problem solving and analytical skills. D-Ma-A09 Ability to communicate complex information,
D-Ma-A04 Attention to detail and accuracy. or ideas in a confident  well-organized manner
D-Ma-A05 Ability to work independently and in a team through verbal, written, andor visual means.
environment with good communication and D-Ma-A10 Ability to evaluate information for reliability,
collaboration skills. validity, and relevance.
D-Ma-A06 Ability to work with considerable latitude and D-Ma-A11 Ability to build complex data structures and
independence of action. high-level programming languages.
D-Ma-A07 Ability to clearly communicate technical D-Ma-K12 Ability to function in a collaborative
concepts verbally and in writing to environment, seeking continuous consultation
management, technical staff, and customers with other data science members and
in terms appropriate for each audience. experts both internal and external to the
organizationto leverage analytical and
technical expertise.
- Abachelors degree in computer science, statistics, mathematics, software engineering or related field is usually required.
- Amasters or doctoral degree in statistics, machine learning, data science, or a related field is usually preferred.
EDUCATION
- Experience with data modeling solutions, including tools, industry data models, data warehouse approaches, data
modeling approaches relational, and dimensional or equivalent knowledge is required.
EXPERIENCE
--- Page 61 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
5.5 Research Category
al Intelligence (Al) Ethicist
WORK ROLE Artificial Intelligence (Al) Research Scientist
OCCUPATION CODE Al-R
Research
SPECIALTY AREA Artificial Intelligence (Al) Research
This job applies scientific discovery researchprocess, including hypothesis and hypothesis testing, to obtain actionable
knowledge related to scientific problem, business process, or reveal hidden relations between multiple processes. The
goal of Al Research is to explore and advance cutting-edge research in Al, including ML as well as related fields like
Cryptography, to develop and discover principles of impact to an organizations clients and businesses.
GENERAL
JOB
DESCRIPTION
Al-R-T01 Conduct artificial intelligence research, typically within a specialized focus area.
Al-R-T02 Conduct logical analyses of business, scientific, engineering, and other technical problems, formulating
mathematical models of problems for solution by computers.
Work on multiple research projects in collaboration with internal and external researchers and with applied 8-103 -ام
engineering teams.
Al-R-T04 Provide advice on information systems strategy, policy, management and service delivery.
Participate in relevant top-tier academic conferences. 8-105 -ام
Al-R-TO06 Conduct reviews to assess quality assurance practices, software products and information systems.
Al-R-T07 Build models and simulations to describe data, predict events, and inform a course of action.
Al-R-T08 Work with senior leaders to help define, build, and transform businesses.
Al-R-T09 Carry out analysis techniques for data inspection, exploration and visualisation.
AIl-R-T10 Support test and evaluation as well as validation and verification efforts, by developing a test harness to
support systematic evaluation of machine learning frameworks using evaluation data sets.
Al-R-T11 Execute, with team lead oversight, experiments to develop novel assets (algorithms or solutions) to be reused
across organizational teams.
Al-R-T12 Contribute to the RD team by analyzing previous research reports and deriving insights that can be leveraged
in current research use cases.
AI-R-T13 Apply appropriate statistical techniques to available data to discover new relations and offer insight into
research problems, helping to improve organizational processes, support decision making, solve problems, fix
critical errors, and raise important issues to appropriate level.
Al-R-T14 Help to identify the data engineering requirements for any data science product, while working with data
engineers and data scientists to design and deliver those products into the organization effectively.
61
--- Page 62 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-R-S01 Skill in working with ML frameworks, libraries, Al-R-S07 Skill in examining data or facts to determine
SKILLS and packages. appropriate actions or recommendations.
AI-R-S02 Skill in working in an interdisciplinary research AI-R-S08  Skill in determining phases and steps,
environment, especially running experiments. defining activities and tasks and establishing
schedules to complete objectives on time
Al-R-S03 Skill in providing guidance  advice to enable and within budget.
decision-making about tasks, situations, and
processes. 8-509-ام Skill in estimating the results of an action or
Al-R-S04 Skill in preparing and delivering written, oral a series of actions.
or visual material for the workplace that AI-R-S10 Skill in developing machine learning, statistical
presents information. models and experimental designs.
Al-R-S05 Skill in developing alliances, contacts or Al-R-S11 Skill in directing  monitoring the performance
partnerships, and exchanging information of others.
with others. wae 55 0 ,
8-512-دام Skill in identifying  defining concrete machine
AI-R-S06 Skill in building models and simulations to learning tasks and solutions when presented
describe data, predict events, and inform a with broader customer needs.
course of action.
Al-R-KO1 Knowledge of public safety and security Al-R-KO6 Knowledge of critique statistical analyses,
KNOWLEDGE operations and  systems, of policy, and application of machine learning
regulations and procedures for the techniques and methodologies.
protection of people, data and property. Al-R-KO7 Knowledge of a broad range of statistical
Al-R-K02 Knowledge of all aspects of the research tools, particularly those deployed within the
lifecycle such as formulating problems, organization,  can use these appropriately
gathering data, generating hypotheses, and help others to use them.
developing models and  algorithms, Al-R-KO8 Knowledge of MLDL techniques both from
conducting experiments,  synthesizing mathematical formulation to applied issues
results, building prototype applications and such 35 loss functions, optimization
communicating the significance of research. methods, sampling, under- and over-fitting.
Al-R-KO3 Knowledge of arithmetic, algebra, geometry, Al-R-KO9 Knowledge of the role of ethical Al and its
calculus and their applications, principles, application in research projects.
methods and function. Al-R-K10 Knowledge of exploratory and confirmatory
Al-R-K04 Knowledge of core Al disciplines create new data analysis.
methods and architectures of new AI-R-K11 Knowledge of computer systems organization
algorithms. for big data applications, CAP, BASE and
Al-R-Ko5 Knowledge of one or more specialized areas ACID theorems.
e.g., deep learning (DL), reinforcement
learning (RL), planning, information
representation  retrieval, graphs, multiagent analytics.
systems (MAS), natural language processing AI-R-K13 Knowledge of data visualization tools and
(NLP), or other Al fields.
Al-R-K12 Knowledge of quantitative and qualitative
agile delivery methodologies and concepts.
--- Page 63 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al-R-A01 Ability to work in collaborative project AI-R-A05 Ability to understand applied mathematics
ABILITIES settings. and statistics methods, and can use this
Al-R-A02 Ability to obtain and maintain a KSA Top knowledge to carry out Al related-tasks.
Secret level security clearance. If selected, Al-R-A06 Ability to collect, prepare and analyse
heshe will be subject to a government datasets.
security clearance investigation and must AI-R-A07 Ability to work under tight timelines, in cases
meet the requirements for access to for multiple project deliveries.
classified information. Al-R-A08 Ability to adapt in a fast paced multinational
AI-R-A03 Ability to translate mathematical concepts environment.
into well-documented and efficient code. Al-R-A09 Ability to coordinate with several institutes to
Al-R-A04 Ability to interpreting statistical output build data and code repositories.
effectively and accurately.
- A masters degree in statistics, mathematics, computer science, computer systems engineering or related discipline is
usually required.
- A masters or doctoral degree in artificial intelligence, machine learning, data science, or a related quantitative field is
usually preferred.
EDUCATION
- Experience in research is usually required.
- Experience in statistical modelling or machine learning is usually required.
EXPERIENCE
--- Page 64 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
حت
SDAIA recommends that the organizations and practitioners should
invest in human capital by applying the National Occupational
Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence, which will
contribute to improve and refine practices and formulating career
paths for national capabilities and benefitting from it in the applica-
tions related to the human capacity development. For instance: tal-
ent acquisition, job description development, workforce planning,
guiding and developing individuals professionally, performance
management and evaluation, developing licenses and accredit-
ed professional certificates, and developing national occupational
policies. Besides, one of SDAIA uses of the National Occupational
Standard Framework for Data and Artificial Intelligence in formulat-
ing career paths can be viewed in (Annex A).
--- Page 65 ---
for Data  Artificial Intelligence
--- Page 66 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Annex (A)
SDAIA has applied the national occupational standards in Data  Al. This is achieved by applying internally
defined occupations with standardized job titles  career paths for each profession.
SADAD implemented the National Occupational Standards Framework for Data  Al by aligning the
framework with occupations internally  creating unified job titles  paths for each profession.
These paths and titles allow employees to clearly understand their career progression at all levels and the
job requirements within it.
This step is part of SDAIAs efforts to develop human capital, as the framework outlines the required tasks
to perform and the knowledge and skills that enable employees to perform tasks. this is linked with
employee training requirements through learning paths, professional certifications, and on-the-job training
programs.
--- Page 67 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Career paths for core data and artificial intelligence jobs
Chief Expert Principle Senior Data
Data Engineer
Data Engineer Data Engineer Data Engineer Data Engineer Engineering
Chief Expert Principle Senior
Data Scientist Data Science
Data Scientist Data Scientist Data Scientist Data Scientist
Chief Expert Principle Senior
Data Analyst Data Analysis
Data Analyst Data Analyst Data Analyst Data Analyst
Chief Expert Principle Senior 1 , ,
Al Engineer Al Engineering
Al Engineer Al Engineer Al Engineer Al Engineer
Chief Expert Principle Senior Al
Al Researcher Al Researcher Al Researcher Al Researcher Researcher Al Research
--- Page 68 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al Engineer
Requirements Progression
Promotion
Education ears  Accreditation en  raining programs,
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
Fresh A certificate Job rotation  training Intensive Training programs
Graduate of readiness with close supervision bootcamps in the required
from the from a team lead on Competencies, such as but not
some or the limited to:
Education - Deep Learning Specialization by
required competencies:
and Trainin: 00 deeplearning Al.
9 Computer Vision, NLP, ech SRN
5 1 - Machine Learning by Andrew Ng,
Evaluation - Deep Learning, Data
50 Stanford University.
Commission  Science, DevOps, Agile
- Applied Al with DeepLearning by
Al Development, Privacy jay.
Engineer Security Compliance, professional Certificates in the
Bachelors Data Engineering, Data required competencies such as
5 Governance. but not limited to (or equivalent):
Degree in
- Google TensorFlow Developer
Computer Certificate. : Human
5 Practical
Science, - AWS Certified Machine Resources, tests
Electric Cetinllnte, Department
1 : - Specialtyz. (to be ,Engineering 5 requirements- Microsoft Certified Azure Al devioped)
or relevant Engineer Associate. for promotion
field
2-4 years of SDAIA On job training with Professional Certificates in
experience in Professional Minor supervision the required competencies
from a team lead for suchas but not limited to (or
intermediate level on equivalent):
AlIML Accreditation
engineering (Senior)
: some or all the required - Google Machine Learning
Senior experience competencies: Professional.
Al or software Computer Vision, NLP, - IBM Al Engineering
Engineer development Deep Learning, Data Professional Certificate.
or equivalent Science, DevOps, Agile
Development, Privacy
Security Compliance,
experience in
ML
Data Engineering, Data
Governance.
--- Page 69 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al Engineer
Requirements Progression
Technical Promotion
Evaluation  Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
Bachelors 4-6 years of SDAIA - Mentoring  training Recommended Professional
Degree in experience in Professional number of engineers  development training and
Computer AlML Accreditation senior engineers. Certificates, Such as but not
Science, engineering (Principle) - Technically leading 2 limited to:
Electric experience team of engineers in MIT technical leaders training:
Engineering or software number of projects with - Gordon-MIT Engineering
orrelevant development reporting to a project Leadership Program.
Human
oe field or equivalent manager. - Technology Leadership
Principle Resources
Al experience in Program. No test
ML Public Speaking for Technical ired Department
: ublic Speaking for Technica require
Engineer requirements
Leaders:
for promotion
- Speaking as a leader by the
Humphrey group.
Leaders programs by Harvard
Business School:
- Program for Leadership
Development.
- Negotiation Mastery.
--- Page 70 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al Engineer
Progression
Technical Promotion
Requirements
Evaluation  Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
6-8 years of Recomended Advanced
experience in Professional Development
AIML Certificates for Technical
engineering Leaders, such as but not
Expert Al experience or limited to:
Engineer software Executive leaders programs
development by Harvard Business School:
Bachelors  or equivalent - Advanced Management
Degree in  experience in Program (AMP). Human
- Resources
Computer ML Expert General Management No test
i . Department
Science, evaluation Program (GMP). required م َ
Electric - Fully managing and - Driving Digital Strategy. requirements
Engineering leading a team of - Leading Change and for promotion
or relevant principles in a number Organizational Renewal.
field 1 of projects.
Chief Al 8 years of pros
Engineer experience in
AIML
engineering
experience or
software
development
or equivalent
experience in
ML
--- Page 71 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al Research
uirements Progression
Promotion
( 7 1 On Job ) Traini  1 Requirement
. ears 0 300 nJo raining programs
Educat : Accreditat : 3 : vee
ucation  Experience coreanation Practice  Training   Professional Certificates
Fresh Acertificate  On job rotation and Recommendation for:
Graduate ofreadiness Waning with close - Attending national and
supervision for entry
from the level on some or all international conferences.
Education the required - Nomination for postgraduate
Al and Training competencies: scholarships for masters
R h Develop and implement
esearcner Evaluation artificial intelligence degree holders.
Commission  SOlutions for processing
big data and conduct
research in the fields of
Bachelors artificial intelligence and
data science.
Degree in 1 Human
Practical
Computer 2-4 years of SDAIA On job training with Training professional tests Resources
Science, experience in Professional minor supervision from development  professional (to be Department
Electric researchin Accreditation  team lead for certifications are devloped) requirements
Engineering artificial (Senior) intermediate level on recommended, including but for promotion
or relevant intelligence some or all the required not limited to:
field sciences. competencies: Training for technical leaders
Develop and implement at MIT:
Senior artificial intelligence - Gordon-MIT Engineering
Leadership Program.
Al i i
solutions for processing  Tacineleap تمجه
Researcher big data and conduct Program.
research in the fields of  Public Speaking for Technical
Leaders:
artificial intelligence and
- Speak like a leader.
Leadership Programs from
Harvard Business School:
- Leadership Development
Program.
- Negotiation Mastery.
data science.
--- Page 72 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al Research
Technical Promotion
5 Evaluation  Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
4-6 years of SDAIA - Mentoring  Advanced professional
experience in Professional training number of Al training
research in Accreditation researchers  senior Al  Certifications for
Bachelors ficial (Principle) researchers. technical leaders are
De 1 intelligence - Technically leading recommended, but not
gree in 500
6 t sciences a team of limited to:
omputer :
Harvard Business School Human
naa Science, researchers ona
Principle ١ Executive Leadership No test Resources
Electric number of projects
Al  Programs: required Department
ngineering reporting to the Project 1
Researcher - AMP Advanced requirements
or relevant Manager.
58 Management Software. for promotion
ie
- Public Administration
Program.
- Leading digital strategy.
- Leading change and
organizational renewal.
--- Page 73 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Al Research
Progression
Technical Promotion
uirements
1 Evaluation  Requirement
On Job Training programs 1
Practice  Training
Years of
Experience
Professional Certificates
cveston
ein
Bachelors 6-8 years of
experience in
Degree in
Computer research in
dienes artificial
Electric intelligence
Engineering sciences. cull ١ 4 Human
- Fully managing an
or relevant 8
0ه
field Expert leading a team of No test Department
5 principles in a number i
evaluation of projects required requirements
for
8 years of 5
promotion
experience in
research in
artificial
intelligence
sciences.
--- Page 74 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Engineer
Promotion
7 1 On Job Traini  1 Requirement
Education  Experience Accreditation Practice  Training Professional Certificates
Fresh Acertificate On job rotation and Intensive Training programs
Graduate ofreadiness  training with close and bootcamps in the
from the supervision for entry required competencies,
Education level on some or all such as but not limited to:
and Training  the required - Data Engineering
Evaluation competencies: Foundations Specialization by
Commission Al Solutions the University of California
- Modern Big Data Analysis
Development, DevOps, 5 9 ae a
with SQL Specialization by
Data Agile Development, the University of California
Enai Privacy and Security - Data Engineering Bootcamp
Engineer
9 Compliance, Data - Data Camp
1 1 Professional Certificates in
Engineering, Data 
the required competencies
Governance. feat
Bachelors such as but not limited to (or Human
: equivalent): Practical
Degree in - IBM Certified Data Engineer gactg Resources
Computer -DAMA-CDAM: The Certified (to be Department
Science, Data Management Associate gevigned) requirements
Electric (CDAM) for
a - AWS Certified Machine ام
Engineering Learning - Specialty.
or relevant 1 30 1
2-4 years of SDAIA On job training with Professional Certificates in
tists experience Professional Minor supervision the required competencies
in Data Accreditation from a team lead for such as but not limited to (or
Engineering (Senior) intermediate level on equivalent):
a some or all the 
or similar  - Data Engineer Professional
required
roles 50 (Google).
Senior competencies: - AWS Certified Big Data
Al Solutions 9 Pata.
Data Development, DevOps,  DAMA-DAA: The Data
Engineer Agile Development, Management Architect (DAA).
Privacy and Security - Google Machine Learning
Compliance, Data Professional.
Engineering, Data
Governance, Machine
Learning.
--- Page 75 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
a Engineer
Technical Promotion
. Evaluation  Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
Bachelors 4-6 years of SDAIA - Mentoring  training  Recommended
Degree in experience Professional number of Al Professional development
Computer inData Accreditation researchers  senior Al  training and Certificates,
Science, Engineering (Principle)  researchers. Such as but not limited to:
Electric or similar - Technically leading a MIT technical leaders
١ 0 training:
Engineering roles team of researchers on
١ - Gordon-MIT Engineering
or relevant a number of projects
1 : Leadership Program.
field reporting to the Project :
Principle - Technology Leadership Human
Manager.
Data Program. No test Resources
Engineer Public Speaking for required Department
Technical Leaders: requirements
- Speaking as a leader by the for
Humphrey group. promotion
Leaders programs by
Harvard Business School:
- Program for Leadership
Development.
- Negotiation Mastery.
--- Page 76 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
a Engineer
Requirements Progression
Technical Promotion
5 Evaluation  Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
Bachelors 6-8 years of Recomended Advanced
Degree in experience Professional Development
Computer in Data Certificates for Technical
Science, Engineering Leaders, such as but not
Electric or similar limited to:
. . Executive leaders programs
Engineering roles
Expert by Harvard Business
or relevant
Data School:
A field
Engineer e - Advanced Management
Program (AMP).
- Fully managing and
Expert  ging - General Management No test etn
xpe 1 leading a team of Program (GMP). required Resources
evaluation principles in anumber  Driving Digital Strategy. Department
of projects. - Leading Change and requirements
Organizational Renewal. for
promotion
8 years of
experience
Chief in Data
Data Engineering
Engineer or similar
roles
--- Page 77 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data ence
Requirements Progression
Promotion
( Requirement
: Years of wae On Job Training programs
Educati A ditat
ueation Experience coreanal 3 Practice  Training Professional Certificates
Fresh Acertificate On job rotation and Intensive Training programs
Graduate ofreadiness training with close and bootcamps in the
from the supervision for entry required competencies,
5 such as but not limited to:
Education level on some or all
00 5 - Data Science Specialization:
تطعا قمع the required Statistics and Machine
Evaluation competencies: Learning.
Commission Machine Learning, Data - Data Science Applications
Science, Al Solution using Python from the
Data Development, Agile University of Michigan.
Scientist Development, Model - ومتمعدها عمتطعدالا tix
Testi Stanford University.
ند - Data Visualization and
Communication using
Tableau.
Professional Certificates in
the required competencies
such as but not limited to
(or equivalent): Human
Masters - Microsoft Azure Data Practical
1 Resources
in Data Science Specialist. tests
. Department
Science or - Data Analyst using (to be
i requirements
equivalent Microsoft Power BI. devloped)
- AWS Certified Machine for
Learning Practitioner. promotion
2-4 years of SDAIA On job training with Professional Certificates in
experience Professional Minor supervision the required competencies
in data ecrenitation from a team lead for such as but not limited to
science and (Senior) intermediate level on (or equivalent):
1 some or all the - Data Science Professional
Senior analysis or a required Certification from IBM.
Data related field. competencies: - Google Data Analytics
Scientist Machine Learning, Data Professional Certification.
Science, Al Solution - Machine Learning
Development, Agile Professional Engineer.
Development, Model
Testing.
--- Page 78 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
a ence
Requirements Progression
Technical Promotion
Evaluation  Requirement
5 Years of aoa On Job Training programs
Education Experience اموعدم Practice  Training Professional Certificates
4-6 years of SDAIA - Mentoring  training Recommended Professional
experience Professional number ofAlresearchers development training and
in data Accreditation senior Al researchers. Certificates, Such as but not
science and (Principle) - Technically leading  limited to:
analysis or a ateam of researchers MIT technical leaders training:
related field. on anumber of projects - Gordon-MIT Engineering
reporting to the Project Leadership Program. Hanan
Principle Masters Manager. - Technology Leadership Resources
Data in Data Program. No test Department
Scientist  Public Speaking for Technical edired  requirements
equivalent Tenders for
promotion
- Speaking as a leader by the
Humphrey group.
Leaders programs by Harvard
Business School:
- Program for Leadership
Development.
- Negotiation Mastery.
--- Page 79 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Requirements Progression
Technical Promotion
١ Years of 058 On Job  Training programs Evaluation Requirement
eavaton Experience pocredtaion  Practice  Training  Professional Certificates
6-8 years of Recomended Advanced
experience Professional Development
in data Certificates for Technical
1 Leaders, such as but not
Expert science and limited to:
Data analysis or a Executive leaders programs
Scientist related field. by Harvard Business
School:
- Advanced Management Human
Masters - Fully managing and Program (AMP). Resources
in Data Expert  leading a team of - General Management Notest Department
Science or evaluation principles inanumber Program (GMP). required requirements
equivalent of projects. - Driving Digital Strategy. fon
- Leading Change and promotion
Organizational Renewal.
Chief
Data 8 years of Recommendation for:
Scientist experience - Attending national and
in data international conferences.
science and - Nomination for
analysis or a postgraduate scholarships.
--- Page 80 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Analysis
uirements Progression
Technical
Promotion
Requirement
Y 1 On Job Traini 5 Evaluation
. ears 0 ag: in Jo raining program:
Education Experience Accreditation  Practice  Training   Professional Certificates
Acertificate On job rotation and Professional certificates in
ofreadiness training with close the required competencies
from the supervision for entry include, but are not limited
Education levelon some orallthe  to (or their equivalent):
and Training required competencies: - DAMA Framework.
Evaluation Statistical - CDMP ASSOCIATE.
Bachelors Fresh Practical Human
1 Commission  Understanding,
degree in Graduate tests Resources
Programming with
Computer (to be Department
Data Sci Python, R or SQL,
cience, devioped) requirements
Analyst ability to query and Pec) 4
Information for promotion
analyze data using
SQL, Predictive
Technology,
or equivalent
analysis skills, creating
graphs and illustrations
to simplify data and
make it easier to
understand.
--- Page 81 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Promotion
uirements Progression
Technical
Evaluationg Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
Bachelors 2-4yearsof SDAIA On job training with Professional Certificates in
degree in experience Professional minor supervision the required competencies
Computer in data Accreditation from a team lead for such as but not limited to
Science, analysis (Senior) intermediate level on (or equivalent):
Information using some or all the - Data Science Professional
Technology, statistical, required Certification from IBM.
or mathematical, competencies: - Google Data Analytics
equivalent and Statistical Professional Certification.
5 Human
Senior computationa Understanding, - Machine Learning Practical
Resources
Data  methods to Programming with Professional Engineer. tests
Department
Analyst explore Python, R or SQL, (to be 1
requirements
patterns and ability to query and devloped)
for promotion
trends in analyze data using
data. SQL, Predictive
analysis skills, creating
graphs and illustrations
to simplify data and
make it easier to
understand.
--- Page 82 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Requirements Progression
Promotion
Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs 5
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
4-6 years of SDAIA - Mentoring  training Professional certificates in
experiencein Professional number of Al the required competencies
data analysis Accreditation researchers  senior Al  include, but are not limited to
using (Principle) researchers. (or their equivalent):
statistical, - Technically leading -CDMP PRACTITIONER.
Principle mathematical, a team of researchers on
Data and a number of projects
Analyst computational reporting to the Project
methods to Manager.
explore
Bachelors 1
1 patterns and
degree in Human
trends in data.
Computer No test Resources
lo tes
Science, ired Department
1 1 ١ ae : require
Information 6-8 years of Fully managing and Training, professional requirements
5500 experience in leading a team of development  professional Fon prerneen
0 data analysis principles inanumber  certifications are
satel: using of projects. recommended, including but
statistical, not limited to:
Expert mathematical, Expert -CDMP PRACTITIONER.
evaluation
Data and عام
Analyst computational -TOGAF.
methods to -ISO 8000.
explore -Lean Six Sigma
patterns and GreenBlack Belt.
trends in data.
--- Page 83 ---
National Occupational Standard Framework for Data  Artificial Intelligence
Data Science
quirements Progression
Technical
Promotion
5 Evaluation Requirement
Education Years of Accreditation On Job Training programs
Experience Practice  Training Professional Certificates
8 years of -Experience in Recommendation for:
experience leadership and - Attending national and
in data management. international conferences.
Bachelors analysis -Experience in - Nomination for postgraduate eae
degree in using project management. scholarships.
istical Notest Resources
Chief Computer Statistical, Expert
. required Department
Data Science, Mathematical, evaluation
requirements
205151 Information and
Technology, Ccomputationa for promotion
or equivalent  methods to
explore
patterns and
trends in data.
--- Page 86 ---
May 2025 ic. SDAIA
Document Number  SDAIA-P117
Version Number  2
SDAIA.GOV.SA QSDAIASA BSDAIA.SAUDI  SDAIA-KSA