--- Page 3 ---
Table of Content
Introduction
Definitions
Scope
Al Ethics Principles and Controls
Roles and Responsibilities
Appendices
--- Page 4 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Due to the fast growth of practices and technologies around Artificial Intelligence (Al), the use of Al has
expanded to several industries such as health, education, entertainment, etc. Al helps make entities dec-
sion-making processes more efficient, accurate and faster by predicting future patterns. Al can be used to
analyze data, including big data, by developing and operating systems with advanced models and algrithms
that help improve the quality of processes. Due to the increasing interest in these technologies, many enti-
ties in both the public and private sectors, in addition to non-profit entities, have developed digital solutions
based on Al to address existing challenges using creative and innovative methods, thus making the role of Al
more essential to maintain the competitive capabilities of these entities.
--- Page 5 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Due to the fast growth of practices and technologies around Artificial Intelligence (Al), the use of Al has epand-
ed to several industries such as health, education, entertainment, etc. Al helps make entities decsion-making
processes more efficient, accurate and faster by predicting future patterns. Al can be used to analyze data,
including big data, by developing and operating systems with advanced models and algorithms that help im-
prove the quality of processes. Due to the increasing interest in these technologies, many entities in both the
public and private sectors, in addition to non-profit entities, have developed digital solutions based on Al to
address existing challenges using creative and innovative methods, thus making the role of Al more essential
to maintain the competitive capabilities of these entities.
to adopting Al technology, encouraging research and innovation, and driving economic
Q Support the Kingdoms efforts towards achieving its vision and national strategies related
0 growth for prosperity and development.
Develop and establish Al ethics policies, guidelines, regulations, and frameworks.
Govern data and Al models to limit the negative implications of Al systems (economically,
psychologically, socially, etc.) and potential threats (security, political, etc.).
: a Help entities adopt standards and ethics when building and developing Al-based solutions
Je to ensure responsible use thereof.
fe Protect the privacy of data subjects and their rights with respect to the collection and pro-
Oy cessing of their data.
--- Page 6 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Definitions
For the purposes of this document, the following words and phrases, wherever mentioned herein,
shall have meanings ascribed thereto, unless the context requires otherwise:
Adopting Entity
Any public entity, business, or individual that is required to comply with the present document.
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence or Al is a collection of technologies that can enable a machine or system to sense,
comprehend, act, and learn.
Al System Assessor
Any natural or legal person that audits Al systems to achieve certain goals.
Al System Lifecycle
The cyclical process that Al projects are expected follow to be able to design, build, and produce a robust
and safe system that delivers business value and insights through adhering to a standard and structured
way of managing Al model delivery and implementation.
Authorized User
An individual that is permitted, appropriately cleared, and has a requirement to access an information sys-
tem to perform or assist an established and preset role or responsibility on the systems functionalities and
components.
Al Ethics
A set of values, principles, and techniques to guide moral conduct in developing and using Al technologies.
Al System
A set of predictive models and advanced algorithms that can be used to analyze data and predict the future
or facilitate decision making for projected future events.
--- Page 7 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Al System Developer
Any natural or legal person that develops Al systems by building predictive models using data and algo-
rithms to achieve certain goals.
Al System Owner
Any natural or legal person that applies or uses Al systems to achieve certain goals.
The Chief Data Officer (CDO) is responsible for the development and execution of the Data Management
Data Governance and oversee the implementation practices across the Public Entities.
Data
A collection of facts in a raw or unorganized form such as numbers, characters, images, video, voice re-
cordings, or symbols.
Data Sample
The data used to build, train and test predictive models and Al algorithms to reach specific results.
End-User
Any natural or legal person that consumes or makes use of the goods or services produced by Al systems.
Personal Data
Every data - of whatever source or form  that would lead to the identification of the individual specifically,
or make it possible to identify him directly or indirectly, including: name, personal identification number,
addresses, contact numbers, license numbers, records, personal property, bank account and credit card
numbers, fixed or removing pictures of the individual, and other data of personal nature.
SDAIA
Saudi Data and Artificial Intelligence Authority
--- Page 8 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Validity (Accuracy)
How accurately a method measures what it is intended to measure.
Data Governance
Data governance is the process of managing the availability, usability, integrity, and security of data in
organizations and systems, based on data standards and policies that also control data usage.
Data Subject
An individual to whom the personal data belongs, his representative, or whoever has legal guardianship
over him.
National Regulatory Authority
Any independent governmental or public entity assuming regulatory duties and responsibilities for a specific
sector in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia under a legal instrument.
Reliability
The property of intended consistency in behavior and results.
Sensitive Data
Personal data that indicates or includes a reference to a persons ethnic or tribal origin religious, intellectu-
al or political beliefs membership of civil associations or institutions criminal and security data biometric
identifying data genetic data credit data health data location data and data that indicates that one or
both of an individuals parents are unknown.
--- Page 9 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Scope
This Al Ethics Framework shall apply to all Al stakeholders designing, developing, deploying, implementing,
using, or being affected by Al systems within KSA, including but not limited to public entities, private entities,
non-profit entities, researchers, public services, institutions, civil society organizations, individuals, workers,
and consumers.
Al Risks
The categories and levels of risks associated with the development andor use of artificial intelligence are
classified into the following:
Little or no risk: There are no restrictions on Al systems that pose little or no risk such as spam
filters, but it is recommended that these systems be ethically compliant.
Limited risk: Al systems that pose limited risks, such as technical programs related to function,
development, and performance, are subject to the application of the Al ethics principles mentioned in
this document.
High risk: Al systems that pose high risks to basic rights must undergo pre- and post-conformity
assessments, and in addition to adhering to ethics, the relevant statutory requirements must be con-
sidered.
Unacceptable risk: Al systems that pose an unacceptable risk to peoples safety, livelihood, and
rights such as those related to social profiling, exploitation of children, or distortion of behavior that
are likely to occur are not allowed.
Risk management should be directly interlinked into Al initiatives, so that oversight is concurrent with internal
development of Al technology. Risk management of Al systems affects a wide range of risk types including
data, algorithm, compliance, operational, legal, reputational, and regulatory risks. Risk management subcom-
ponents, such as model interpretability, bias detection, performance monitoring, are built in so that oversight
is constant and consistent with Al development activities. In this approach, standards, testing, and controls
are embedded into various stages of the Al System Lifecycle, from design to development and post-deploy-
ment.
--- Page 10 ---
Al Ethics Principles
The Al System Lifecycle is the cyclical process that Al projects follow. It defines each step that an organi-
zation is expected to follow to take advantage of Al to derive practical business value. It is a standard way
of representing the tasks based on best practices in implementing and managing Al models which makes
it a great candidate for embedding Al ethics.
--- Page 11 ---
Al Ethics Principles
The Al System Lifecycle is split into four steps, all of which have equal importance, and the relevant
activities are explained below:
Plan and Design Prepare Input Data
- Define the problem - Gather data
- Support your problem with a data-driven - Discover and assess data
approach - Cleanse and validate data
- Selecta framing approach on technology - Transform data into Al model input features
and system which governs Al
- Conduct feasibility assessment for the Plan and
selected approach Design
- Define KPls
Prepare
Input
Data
Build and
Validate
Deploy and Monitor Build and Validate
- Deploy the model to the Al system - Train and test the model
- Create versioning structure - Tune the hyperparameters of the model
- Monitor the production model performance - Validate model performance
periodically - Risk Evaluation
- Assess if there is a need to change the design
according to results of periodic reviews
--- Page 12 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Al Ethics Principles and Controls
Principle 1 - Fairness
The fairness principle requires taking necessary actions to eliminate bias, discrimination or stigmatization of
individuals, communities, or groups in the design, data, development, deployment and use of Al systems.
Bias may occur due to data, representation or algorithms and could lead to discrimination against the histor-
ically disadvantaged groups.
When designing, selecting, and developing Al systems, it is essential to ensure just, fair, non-biased, non-dis-
criminatory and objective standards that are inclusive, diverse, and representative of all or targeted segments
of society. The functionality of an Al system should not be limited to a specific group based on gender, race,
religion, disability, age, or sexual orientation. In addition, the potential risks, overall benefits, and purpose of
utilizing sensitive personal data should be well-motivated and defined or articulated by the Al System Owner.
To ensure consistent Al systems that are based on fairness and inclusiveness, Al systems should be trained
on data that are cleansed from bias and is representative of affected minority groups. Al algorithms should be
built and developed in a manner that makes their composition free from bias and correlation fallacy.
--- Page 13 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Plan and Design:
1- At the initial stages of setting out the purpose of the Al system, the design team shall collaborate to pipoint
the objectives and how to reach them in an efficient and optimized manner. Planning the design of the Al
system is an essential stage to translate the systems intended goals and outcomes. During this phase, it is
important to implement a fairness-aware design that takes appropriate precautions across the Al system al-
gorithm, processes, and mechanisms to prevent biases from having a discriminatory effect or lead to skewed
and unwanted results or outcomes.
2- Fairness-aware design should start at the beginning of the Al System Lifecycle with a collaborative effort
from technical and non-technical members to identify potential harm and benefits, affected individuals and
vulnerable groups and evaluate how they are impacted by the results and whether the impact is justifiable
given the general purpose of the Al system.
3- A fairness assessment of the Al system is crucial, and the metrics should be selected at this stage of the
Al System Lifecycle. The metrics should be chosen based on the algorithm type (rule-based, classification,
regression, etc.), the effect of the decision (punitive, selective, etc.), and the harm and benefit on correctly
and incorrectly predicted samples.
4- Sensitive personal data attributes relating to persons or groups which are systematically or historical-
ly disadvantaged should be identified and defined at this stage. The allowed threshold which makes the
assessment fair or unfair should be defined. The fairness assessment metrics to be applied to sensitive
features should be measured during future steps.
--- Page 14 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data:
1- Following the best practice of responsible data acquisition, handling, classification, and management
must be a priority to ensure that results and outcomes align with the Al systems set goals and objectives.
Effective data quality soundness and procurement begin by ensuring the integrity of the data source and
data accuracy in representing all observations to avoid the systematic disadvantaging of under-represented
or advantaging over-represented groups. The quantity and quality of the data sets should be sufficient and
accurate to serve the purpose of the system. The sample size of the data collected or procured has a signif-
icant impact on theaccuracy and fairness of the outputs of a trained model.
2- Sensitive personal data attributes which are defined in the plan and design phase should not be included
in the model data not to feed the existing bias on them. Also, the proxies of the sensitive features should be
analyzed and not included in the input data. In some cases, this may not be possible due to the accuracy or
objective of the Al system. In this case, the justification of the usage of the sensitive personal data attributes
or their proxies should be provided.
Build and Validate:
1- At the build and validate stage of the Al System Lifecycle, it is essential to take into consideration im-
plementation fairness as a common theme when building, testing, and implementing the Al system. Model
building and feature selection will require engineers and designers to be aware that the choices made about
grouping or separating and including or excluding features as well as more general judgments about the reli-
ability and security of the total set of features may have significant consequences for vulnerable or protected
groups.
2- During the selection of the champion model, the fairness metric assessment should be considered. The
champion model fairness metrics should be within the defined threshold for the sensitive features. The op-
timization approach of fairness and performance metrics should be clearly set throughout this phase. The
fairness assessment should be justified if the champion model does not pass the assessment.
3- Causality-based feature selection should be ensured. Selected features should be verified with business
owners and non-technical teams.
4- Automated decision-support technologies present major risks of bias and unwanted application at the
deployment phase, so it is critical to set out mechanisms to prevent harmful and discriminatory results at this
phase.
--- Page 15 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Deploy and Monitor:
1- Well-defined mechanisms and protocols should be set in place when deploying the Al system to measure
the fairness and performance of the outcomes and how it impacts individuals and communities. When ana-
lyzing the outcomes of the predictive model, it should be assessed if represented groups in the data sample
receive benefits in equal or similar portions and if the Al system disproportionately harms specific members
based on demographic differences to ensure outcome fairness.
2- The predefined fairness metrics should be monitored in production. If there is any deviation from the al-
lowed threshold, it should be investigated whether there is a need to renew the model.
3- The overall harm and benefit of the system should be quantified and materialized on the sensitive groups.
Principle 2 - Privacy  Security
The privacy and security principle represents overarching values that require Al systems throughout the Al
System Lifecycle to be built in a safe way that respects the privacy of the data collected as well as upholds
the highest levels of data security processes and procedures to keep the data confidential preventing data
and system breaches which could lead to reputational, psychological, financial, professional, or other types
of harm. Al systems should be designed with mechanisms and controls that provide the possibility to govern
and monitor their outcomes and progress throughout their lifecycle to ensure continuous monitoring within
the privacy and security principles and protocols set in place.
--- Page 16 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Plan and Design:
1- The planning and design of the Al system and its associated algorithm must be configured and modelled
in a manner such that there is respect for the protection of the privacy of individuals, personal data is not
misused and exploited, and the decision criteria of the automated technology is not based on personally
identifying characteristics or information.
2- The use of personal information should be limited only to that which is necessary for the proper function-
ing of the system. The design of Al systems resulting in the profiling of individuals or communities may only
occur if approved by Chief Compliance and Ethics Officer, Compliance Officer or in compliance with a code
of ethics and conduct developed by a national regulatory authority for the specific sector or industry.
3- The security and protection blueprint of the Al system, including the data to be processed and the algo-
rithm to be used, should be aligned to best practices to be able to withstand cyberattacks and data breach
attempts.
4- Privacy and security legal frameworks and standards should be followed and customized for the particular
use case or organization.
5- An important aspect of privacy and security is data architecture consequently, data classification and
profiling should be planned to define the levels of protection and usage of personal data.
6- Security mechanisms for de-identification should be planned for the sensitive or personal data in the sys-
tem. Furthermore, readwriteupdate actions should be authorized for the relevant groups.
--- Page 17 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data:
1- The exercise of data procurement, management, and organization should uphold the legal frameworks and
standards of data privacy. Data privacy and security protect information from a wide range of threats.
2- The confidentiality of data ensures that information is accessible only to those who are authorized to ac-
cess the information and that there are specific controls that manage the delegation of authority.
3- Designers and engineers of the Al system must exhibit the appropriate levels of integrity to safeguard the
accuracy and completeness of information and processing methods to ensure that the privacy and security
legal framework and standards are followed. They should also ensure that the availability and storage of data
are protected through suitable security database systems.
4- All processed data should be classified to ensure that it receives the appropriate level of protection in ac-
cordance with its sensitivity or security classification and that Al system developers and owners are aware of
the classification or sensitivity of the information they are handling and the associated requirements to keep it
secure. All data shall be classified in terms of business requirements, criticality, and sensitivity in order to pre-
vent unauthorized disclosure or modification. Data classification should be conducted in a contextual man-
ner that does not result in the inference of personal information. Furthermore, de-identification mechanisms
should be employed based on data classification as well as requirements relating to data protection laws.
5- Data backups and archiving actions should be taken in this stage to align with business continuity, disaster
recovery and risk mitigation policies.
--- Page 18 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Build and Validate:
1- Privacy and security by design should be implemented while building the Al system. The security mech-
anisms should include the protection of various architectural dimensions of an Al model from malicious
attacks. The structure and modules of the Al system should be protected from unauthorized modification or
damage to any of its components.
2- The Al system should be secure to ensure and maintain the integrity of the information it processes. This
ensures that the system remains continuously functional and accessible to authorized users. It is crucial that
the system safeguards confidential and private information, even under hostile or adversarial conditions. Fur-
thermore, appropriate measures should be in place to ensure that Al systems with automated decision-mak-
ing capabilities uphold the necessary data privacy and security standards.
3- The Al System should be tested to ensure that the combination of available data does not reveal the sen-
sitive data or break the anonymity of the observation.
Deploy and Monitor:
1- After the deployment of the Al system, when its outcomes are realized, there must be continuous monitor-
ing to ensure that the Al system is privacy-preserving, safe and secure. The privacy impact assessment and
risk management assessment should be continuously revisited to ensure that societal and ethical consider-
ations are regularly evaluated.
2- Al System Owners should be accountable for the design and implementation of Al systems in such a way
as to ensure that personal information is protected throughout the life cycle of the Al system. The compo-
nents of the Al system should be updated based on continuous monitoring and privacy impact assessment.
Principle 3 - Humanity
The humanity principle highlights that Al systems should be built using an ethical methodology to be just
and ethically permissible, based on intrinsic and fundamental human rights and cultural values to generate
a beneficial impact on individual stakeholders and communities, in both the long and short-term goals and
objectives to be used for the good of humanity. Predictive models should not be designed to deceive, manip-
ulate, or condition behavior that is not meant to empower, aid, or augment human skills but should adopt a
more human-centric design approach that allows for human choice and determination.
--- Page 19 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Plan and Design:
1- It is essential to design and build a model that is based on the fundamental human rights and cultural val-
ues and principles that are applied within and on the Al systems decisions, processes, and functionalities.
2- The designers of the Al model should define how the Al system will align with fundamental human rights
and KSAs cultural values while designing, building, and testing the technology as well as how the Al system
and its outcomes will strive to achieve and positively contribute to augment and complement human skills
and capabilities.
Prepare Input Data:
1- To ensure that Al models embody a human-centric build and design that requires adhering to practices
of responsible and ethical data management frameworks and processes to be followed according to best
practices and data regulations within KSA.
2- Data must be properly acquired, classified, processed, and accessible to ensure respect for human rights,
and KSAs cultural values and preferences.
Build and Validate:
1- When constructing Al systems, designers and engineers should prioritize building Al systems and algo-
rithms that allow and facilitate decision-making with an outlook of aligning with human rights and KSAs cul-
tural values. The automated decisions that result from Al systems should not act in a partial and standalone
manner without considering broader human rights and cultural values in their final outcomes and results.
2- Designers and Engineers should enable Al systems with the appropriate parameters and algorithm training
to attain outcomes that advance humanity.
--- Page 20 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Deploy and Monitor:
1- Periodic assessments of the deployed Al system should be conducted to ensure that its results are aligned
with human rights and cultural values, accuracy key performance indicators (KPIs), and impact on individuals
or communities to ensure the continuous improvement of the technology.
2- Designers of Al models should establish mechanisms of assessing Al systems against fundamental hu-
man rights and cultural values to mitigate any negative and harmful outcomes resulting from the use of the
Al system. If any negative and harmful outcomes are found, the owner of the Al system should identify the
areas that need to be addressed and apply corrective measures to recursively improve the functioning and
outcomes of the Al system.
Principle 4  Social  Environmental Benefits
The social and environmental benefit principle embraces the beneficial and positive impact of social and
environmental priorities that should benefit individuals and the wider community that focus on sustainable
goals and objectives. Al systems should neither cause nor accelerate harm or otherwise adversely affect
human beings but rather contribute to empowering and complementing social and environmental progress
while addressing associated social and environmental ills. This entails the protection of social good as well
as environmental sustainability.
Plan and Design:
1- Al systems have a significant impact on communities and the ecosystems that they live in hence Al System
Owners should have a high sense of awareness that these technologies may have disruptive and transform-
ative effects on society and the environment. The design of Al systems should be approached in an ethical
and sensitive manner in line with the values of prevention of harm to both human beings and the environment.
2- When planning and designing Al systems, due consideration should be given to preventing and helping
address social and environmental issues in a way that will ensure sustainable social and ecological respon-
sibility.
--- Page 21 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data:
1- The processes and policies that govern data management should be followed when preparing the catego-
rization and structuring of data that will feed into the Al system.
2- The data pertaining to the social and environmental topics should be accessible to the public data infra-
structure and must clearly articulate the social benefit of the data presented.
Build and Validate:
1- The models and algorithms must have, as their ultimate goal, a result linked to a socially recognized
end, with the ability to demonstrate how the expected results relate to that social or environmental purpose
through transformative and impactful benefits where applicable.
2- It is best practice to measure and maintain acceptable levels of resource usage and energy consumption
during this phase setting the tone that Al systems not only strive to foster Al solutions that address global
concerns relating to social and environmental issues but also practice sustainable and ecological responsi-
bilities
Deploy and Monitor:
1- After the deployment of the Al system, the Al System Owner should ensure that continuous assessment
of the human, social, cultural, economic and environmental impact of Al technologies are carried out with full
cognizance of the implications of the Al system for sustainability as a set of constantly evolving goals across
a range of dimensions against the priority objectives that were set at the Plan and Design phase.
2- The Al System Owner should also foster and encourage the power of Al solutions in addressing areas of
global concern aligning with sustainable development goals.
--- Page 22 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Principle 5 - Reliability  Safety
The reliability and safety principle ensures that the Al system adheres to the set specifications and that the
Al system behaves exactly as its designers intended and anticipated. Reliability is a measure of consistency
and provides confidence in how robust a system is. It is a measure of dependability with which it operationally
conforms to its intended functionality and the outcomes it produces. On the other hand, safety is a measure
of how the Al system does not pose a risk of harm or danger to society and individuals. As an illustration, Al
systems such as autonomous vehicles can pose a risk to peoples lives if living organisms are not properly
recognized, certain scenarios are not trained for or if the system malfunctions. A reliable working system
should be safe by not posing a danger to society and should have built-in mechanisms to prevent harm.
The risk mitigation framework is closely related to this principle. Potential risks and unintended harms should
be minimized in this aspect.
The predictive model should be monitored and controlled in a periodic and continuous manner to check if its
operations and functionality are aligned with the designed structure and frameworks in place. The Al system
should be technically sound, robust, and developed to prevent malicious usage to exploit its data and out-
comes to harm entities, individuals or communities. A continuous implementationcontinuous development
approach is essential to ensure reliability.
Plan and Design:
1- Designing and developing an Al system that can withstand the uncertainty, instability, and volatility that it
might encounter is crucial.
2- Planning to set out a robust and reliable Al system that works with different sets of inputs and situations is
essential to prevent unintended harm and mitigate risks of system failures when positioned against unknown
and unforeseen events.
3- Establishing a set of standards and protocols for assessing the reliability of an Al system is necessary to
secure the safety of the systems algorithm and data output. It is essential to keep a sustainable technical out-
lay and outcomes generated from the system to maintain the publics trust and confidence in the Al system.
4- The documentation standards are essential to track the evolution of the system, foresee possible risks and
fix vulnerabilities.
5- All critical decision points in the system design should be subject to sign-off by relevant stakeholders to
minimize risks and make stakeholders accountable for the decisions.
--- Page 23 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data:
1- Adequate steps and actions should be taken to measure the data samples quality, accuracy, suitability,
and credibility when dealing with the data sets of an Al model. This is essential to ensure the accuracy of data
interpretation by the Al system, the consistency of avoiding misleading measurements, as well as ensuring
the relevance of the Al systems outcomes to the purpose of the model.
2- It is crucial for the build and validate step to test how the system behaves under outlier events, extreme
parameters, etc. In this step, stress test data should be prepared for extreme scenarios.
Build and Validate:
1- To develop a sound and functional Al system that is both reliable and safe, the Al systems technical
construct should be accompanied by a comprehensive methodology to test the qualit of the predictive da-
ta-based systems and models according to standard policies and protocols.
2- To ensure the technical robustness of an Al system rigorous testing, validation, and re-assessment as well
as the integration of adequate mechanisms of oversight and controls into its development is required. System
integration test sign-off should be done with relevant stakeholders to minimize risks and liability.
3- Automated Al systems involving scenarios where decisions are understood to have an impact that is irre-
versible or difficult to reverse or may involve life-and-death decisions should trigger human oversight and final
determination. Furthermore, Al systems should not be used for social scoring or mass surveillance purposes.
Deploy and Monitor:
1- Monitoring the robustness of the Al system should be adopted and undertaken in a periodic and continu-
ous manner to measure and assess any risks related to the technicalities of the Al system (an inward perspec-
tive) as well as the magnitude of the risk posed by the system and its capabilities (an outward perspective).
2- The model must also be monitored in a periodic and continuous manner to verify whether its operations
and functions are compatible with the designed structure and frameworks. The Al system must also be safe
to prevent destructive use to exploit its data and results to harm entities, individuals, or groups. It is necessary
to continuously work on implementation and development to ensure system reliability.
--- Page 24 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Principle 6 - Transparency  Explainability
The transparency and explainability principle is crucial for building and maintaining trust in Al systems and
technologies. Al systems must be built with a high level of clarity and explainability as well as features to track
the stages of automated decision-making, particularly those that may lead to detrimental effects on data sub-
jects. It follows that data, algorithms, capabilities, processes, and purpose of the Al system need to be trans-
parent and communicated as well as explainable to those who are directly and indirectly affected. The degree
to which the system is traceable, auditable, transparent, and explainable is dependent on the context and
purpose of the Al system and the severity of the outcomes that may result from the technology. Al systems
and their designers should be able to justify how the rationale behind their design, practices, processes, algo-
rithms, and decisions or behaviors are ethically permissible, nondiscriminatory, and nonharmful to the public.
Plan and Design:
1- When designing a transparent and trusted Al system, it is vital to ensure that stakeholders affected by Al
systems are fully aware and informed of how outcomes are processed. They should further be given access
to and an explanation of the rationale for decisions made by the Al technology in an understandable and
contextual manner. Decisions should be traceable. Al system owners must define the level of transparency
for different stakeholders on the technology based on data privacy, sensitivity, and authorization of the stake-
holders.
2- The Al system should be designed to include an information section in the platform to give an overview of
the Al model decisions as part of the overall transparency application of the technology. Information sharing
as a sub-principle should be adhered to with end-users and stakeholders of the Al system upon request or
open to the public, depending on the nature of the Al system and target market. The model should establish
a process mechanism to log and address issues and complaints that arise to be able to resolve them in a
transparent and explainable manner.
--- Page 25 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data:
1- The data sets and the processes that yield the Al systems decision should be documented to the best
possible standard to allow for traceability and an increase in transparency.
2- The data sets should be assessed in the context of their accuracy, suitability, validity, and source. This has
a direct effect on the training and implementation of these systems since the criteria for the datas organiza-
tion, and structuring must be transparent and explainable in their acquisition and collection adhering to data
privacy regulations and intellectual property standards and controls.
Build and Validate:
1- Transparency in Al is thought about from two perspectives, the first is the process behind it (the design
and implementation practices that lead to an algorithmically supported outcome) and the second is in terms
of its product (the content and justification of that outcome). Algorithms should be developed in a transparent
way to ensure that input transparency is evident and explainable to the end-users of the Al system to be able
to provide evidence and information on the data used to process the decisions that have been processed.
2- Transparent and explainable algorithms ensure that stakeholders affected by Al systems, both individuals
and communities, are fully informed when an outcome is processed by the Al system by providing the oppor-
tunity to request explanatory information from the Al system owner. This enables the identification of the Al
decision and its respective analysis which facilitates its auditability as well as its explainability.
3- If the Al system is built by a third party, Al system owners should make sure that an Al Ethics due diligence
is carried out and all the documentation are accessible and traceable before procurement or sign-off.
Deploy and Monitor:
1- Upon deployment of the Al system, performance metrics relating the Al systems output, accuracy and
alignment to priorities and objectives, as well as its measured impact on individuals and communities should
be documented, available and accessible to stakeholders of the Al technology.
2- Information on any system failures, data breaches, system breakdowns, etc. should be logged and stake-
holders should be informed about these instances keeping the performance and execution of the Al system
transparent. Periodic Ul and UX testing should be conducted to avoid the risk of confusion, confirmation of
biases, or cognitive fatigue of the Al system.
--- Page 26 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Principle 7 - Accountability  Responsibility
The accountability and responsibility principle holds designers, vendors, procurers, developers, owners and
assessors of Al systems and the technology itself ethically responsible and liable for the decisions and actions
that may result in potential risk and negative effects on individuals and communities. Human oversight, gov-
ernance, and proper management should be demonstrated across the entire Al System Lifecycle to ensure
that proper mechanisms are in place to avoid harm and misuse of this technology. Al systems should never
lead to people being deceived or unjustifiably impaired in their freedom of choice. The designers, developers,
and people who implement the Al system should be identifiable and assume responsibility and accountability
for any potential damage the technology has on individuals or communities, even if the adverse impact is
unintended. The liable parties should take necessary preventive actions as well as set risk assessment and
mitigation strategy to minimize the harm due to the Al system. The accountability and responsibility principle
is closely related to the fairness principle. The parties responsible for the Al system should ensure that the
fairness of the system is maintained and sustained through control mechanisms. All parties involved in the Al
System Lifecycle should consider and action these values in their decisions and execution.
Plan and Design:
1- This step is crucial to design or procure an Al System in an accountable and responsible manner. The
ethical responsibility and liability for the outcomes of the Al system should be attributable to stakeholders
who are responsible for certain actions in the Al System Lifecycle. It is essential to set a robust governance
structure that defines the authorization and responsibility areas of the internal and external stakeholders
without leaving any areas of uncertainty to achieve this principle. The design approach of the Al system
should respect human rights, and fundamental freedoms as well as the national laws and cultural values of
the kingdom.
2- Organizations can put in place additional instruments such as impact assessments, risk mitigation frame-
works, audit and due diligence mechanisms, redress, and disaster recovery plans.
3- It is essential to build and design a human-controlled Al system where decisions on the processes and
functionality of the technology are monitored and executed, and are susceptible to intervention from author-
ized users. Human governance and oversight establish the necessary control and levels of autonomy through
set mechanisms.
--- Page 27 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data:
1- An important aspect of the Accountability and Responsibility principle during Prepare Input Data step in
the Al System Lifecycle is data quality as it affects the outcome of the Al model and decisions accordingly. It
is, therefore, important to do necessary data quality checks, clean data and ensure the integrity of the data in
order to get accurate results and capture intended behavior in supervised and unsupervised models.
2- Data sets should be approved and signed-off before commencing with developing the Al model. Further-
more, the data should be cleansed from societal biases. In parallel with the fairness principle, the sensitive
features should not be included in the model data. In the event that sensitive features need to be included, the
rationale or trade-off behind the decision for such inclusion should be clearly explained. The data preparation
process and data quality checks should be documented and validated by responsible parties.
3- The documentation of the process is necessary for auditing and risk mitigation. Data must be properly
acquired, classified, processed, and accessible to ease human intervention and control at later stages when
needed.
Build and Validate:
1- Model development of the Al system and algorithm should consist of the selection of features, hyperpa-
rameter tuning and performance metric selection. To achieve this, the technical stakeholders who build and
validate models should be responsible for these decisions.
2- Assigning the appropriate ownership and communicating responsibilities will set the tone for accountability
that would aid in steering the development of the Al system on good reasons, solid interference, and will allow
the intervention of human critical judgement and expertise.
3- The decisions should be supported with quantitative (performance measures on traintest datasets, con-
sistency of the performance on different sensitive groups, performance comparison for each set of hyperpa-
rameters, etc.) and qualitative indicators (decisions to mitigate and correct unintended risks from inaccurate
predictions).
4- The appropriate stakeholders and owners of the Al technology should review and sign off the model after
successful testing and validation of user acceptance testing rounds have been conducted and completed
before the Al models can be productionized.
--- Page 28 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Deploy and Monitor:
1- The responsibility and associated liability in the Deploy and Monitor step should be set clearly. The out-
comes and decisions set in the build and validate step should be monitored continuously and should result
in periodic performance reports.
2- Predefined triggersalerts should be defined for this step on the data and performance metrics. Setting
these triggers is a rigorous process and each trigger should be assigned to the appropriate stakeholder.
These triggersalerts can be defined as part of the risk mitigation or disaster recovery procedure and may
need human oversight.
Roles and Responsibilities
The Al Ethics Framework defines the following roles and responsibilities both at the national and entity level.
National Level
SDAIA
SDAIA works to review and update the principles of artificial intelligence ethics and monitor compliance with
them. SDAIA also prepares national guides, standards, and directives that ensure the effective management
and dissemination of artificial intelligence ethics at the Kingdom level and achieve the desired goal. In order
to implement its objectives, the Authority may carry out the following tasks:
Al Ethics Development: Develop, issue, and update this Al Ethics principles and framework. This
document should be revisited regularly to address possible changes affecting Al Ethics, associated
regulations, communities, and the environment.
Al Ethics Adoption Plan Development: Develop supporting material and provide continuous guidance
to Adopting Entities to facilitate the adoption of this Framework.
Al Ethics Advisory: Support Adopting Entities in complying with this Framework and answer any que-
ries related to the Al Ethics and compliance with this document.
--- Page 29 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Al Ethics Compliance Measurement: Measure compliance of Adopting Entities on a regular basis
based on the defined compliance mechanism directly or through sector regulators (Refer to the Com-
pliance section for more details) and audit Al Ethics activities when required.
Al Ethics Compliance Monitoring: Conduct investigations and audits and monitor compliance with
this Framework with the support of the National Regulatory Authorities.
Adopting Entities
All Adopting Entities shall have the primary responsibility for ensuring that their Al Ethics documents are pub-
lished in compliance with these Al Ethics Principles. As such, Entities shall designate individuals who will be
responsible for carrying out the Al Ethics activities as outlined below.
1- Head of the Entity  Chief Data Officer (CDO): Responsible for the Al Ethics practice within an Entity.
Responsibilities include:
Approve and oversee the implementation of the Al Ethics Plan within the Entity.
Designate different roles with regard to Al Ethics.
Approve the Al Ethics annual report.
Take or delegate the necessary actions for the resolution of the issues that are raised by the CCOCO.
Act as the first point of contact between the Entity and the Authority. The Head of the Entity or CDO
shall resolve any pending issues around Al Ethics for their respective Entity and escalate them to SDAIA
whenever necessary.
--- Page 30 ---
Al Ethics Principles
2- Chief Compliance Officer (CCO)  Compliance Officer (CO): The strategic lead of the Al Ethics practice,
the CO is positioned under the CDO and reports directly to the CDO. The responsibilities of the CCOCO
shall include:
Oversee the development of the Al Ethics Plan and present it to the head of the Entity. The CCOCO
shall also review the performance of Al Ethics to identify improvement opportunities and feed into the
Al Ethics Plan.
Review the Al Ethics identification and prioritization activities, monitor Al Ethics KPls for in-house and
third-party systems, and ensure maintenance activities are being performed.
Ensure compliance of the Entitys Al Ethics activities with national regulations, including but not limited
to Data Classification, Data Privacy, and Freedom of Information. Make sure that third-party systems
comply with these Principles through contractual guarantees.
3- Responsible Al Officer (RAIO): The operational lead of Responsible Al within the entity and works collab-
oratively with other officers from the Data Management team. Responsibilities include:
Develop the Al Ethics Plan, including the Al Ethics prioritization methodology, and set targets and KPIs
to be agreed on with the CCOCO or head of EntityCDO.
Collaborate with other officers in managing, governing, and protecting data.
Defining, updating, maintaining, and reviewing Al ethics priorities and procedures.
Educate and raise awareness across the Entitys employees on Al Ethics and support national aware-
ness campaigns in coordination with the CCOCO.
--- Page 31 ---
Al Ethics Principles
4- Al System Assessor: Responsible for auditing Al systems to achieve certain goals and has the following
responsibilities:
Review communications channels and interactions with stakeholders to provide disclosure and effec-
tive feedback channels.
Conduct periodical reviews on the Al Ethics process and documentation.
Continuously review Al Ethics KPIs.
Publish audit reports on the Al Ethics Assessment of the organization which covers the Al development
and deployment process as well as the third-party Al product procurement process.
Optional Registration
Optional Registration aims to motivate target entities to consider Al ethics when building and developing Al-
based solutions to ensure a responsible use.
Compliance
The Authority may follow up and measure the level of commitment and compliance of registered en-
tities and support them in evaluating compliance with the application of their Al ethics and submitting
optional reports.
--- Page 32 ---
Al Ethics Principles
The level of compliance is measured according to the following:
Displaying the progress of the product or entity in complying with the checklist mentioned in the attach-
ments of this document.
Results of internal or external evaluation of Al ethics.
Objectives of the product or entity and indicators for measuring the performance of Al ethics.
The level of compliance to Al ethics and the fulfillment of its requirements and the badges obtained by
the product or entity.
The authority can assist the entities in reviewing annual reports and make recommendations regarding gen-
eral compliance with Al ethics.
Motivational Badges
To motivate the implementing agencies to register and work with the principles of Al ethics, the Authority may
provide motivational badges that will reflect the level of compliance and progress on Al ethics adoption. The
Authority will issue a guide explaining the mechanism and controls for awarding them.
--- Page 33 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Annexure
Annexure A: Al Ethics Tools
Al Fairness Position Statement: A fairness position statement allows the owner of the Al technology
to clearly state the fairness criteria that have been employed by the Al system and explain the rationale
and logic behind it in a direct and non-technical language. To implement a fair Al system in a sustainable
way, choosing the right fairness objectives is key to setting the tone of the Al model in terms of its ethi-
cal standards and regulatory requirements. This is done by sharing the reasons and underlying fairness
values expressed throughout the model as well as the decision-making process of the Al model to com-
municate and reach the wider audience. This document would be made accessible and available to the
public and affected individuals and communities.
Ethical Impact Assessment: Al has accelerated innovation in how business is conducted and exe-
cuted by practitioners, and therefore it is imperative to evolve Al system ethical impact assessments to
identify areas that need adjustment and recalibrating to design the Al model into an ethically accepted
technology to maximize its positive impact on complimenting human capabilities and skillsets. The ob-
jective of impact assessments is to evaluate and analyze the level of ethical impact of the Al technology
on individuals or communities in both direct and indirect manners which enables the owner of the Al
system to address identified issues and strengthen areas where improvements and adjustments are re-
quired. It is also essential to be able to assess the ethical risks that the Al system is projecting, analyze
the discriminatory harm impact and accurate representation of the system on the ethical impact through
a diversified and multi-stakeholder analysis, as well as act as a facilitator to address whether a model
should move to production or deployment. One of the purposes of the ethical impact assessment is to
help build public confidence around the Al system and demonstrate consideration and due diligence to
wider the public audience.
Privacy and Security Standards: Privacy and security standards are in place to help companies im-
prove their information security strategy by providing guidelines and best practices based on the com-
panys industry and the type of data they maintain. In the following table, some examples are given for
privacy and security standards:
--- Page 34 ---
Al Ethics Principles
ISO standards for artificial intelligence, such
as the ISO 23894 risk standard and the stan-
dards issued by the Saudi Standards and
Metrology Organization
Standards of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers 2 a
NIST Al Risk Management Framework (Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology)
NIST Al Risk Management Framework (Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology)
CIS Controls (Center for Internet Security
Controls)
PCI-DSS (Payment Card Industry Data
Security Standard)
COBIT (Control Objectives for Information
and Related Technologies)
--- Page 35 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Architecture for Trustworthy Al: The requirements that are stated in the Al Ethics Principles and Con-
trols section should be reflected in the design of the Al system architecture. The Al system architecture
should set the rules and restrictions across the Al System Lifecycle. The principles and controls are
generic and addressing them to the particular use cases or Al systems should be done with the sense-
plan-act theoretical approach. Adapting the architecture to Al Ethics entails the integration of the three
steps of this approach:
Sense: The system should be developed such that it recognizes all environmental elements necessary
to ensure adherence to the requirements
Plan: The system should only consider plans that adhere to the requirements
Act: The systems actions should be restricted to behaviors that realize the requirements.
The technical objectives of accuracy, reliability, safety, and robustness must be prioritized to ensure that the
Al System functions safely. Al System Developers should build a system that will operate accurately and re-
liably, in accordance with the intended design, even when confronted with unexpected changes, anomalies,
and disturbances.
Algorithm Assessment: The objective of the algorithm assessment is to ensure that individuals or
communities are informed about the use of algorithms and the weights and counterweights that exist
to manage their use. The Al maturity of enterprises and government entities are different, and this as-
sessment will show the improvement areas for the respective entities or government entities to improve
descriptions on how algorithms inform or impact decision making, particularly in those cases where
there is a degree of automatic decision making or where the algorithms support decisions that have a
significant impact on individuals or groups. This assessment will balance the human oversight for effi-
cient Al systems.
--- Page 36 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Fairness Assessment: It is a set of diagnostic methods that helps you compare how fair models and
label markers perform for specific groups. It checks whether the models result is regularly overestimated
or underestimated for one or more groups compared to others. Additionally, it evaluates how well the
diversity of data is represented for each group. In the following table, fairness assessment tool examples
are included
Google Model Card Toolkit
Al Fairness 360
Microsoft Fairlearn
Google What-If Tool
Aequitas Bias And Fairness Audit Toolkit
Veritas Fairness Assessment Tool
Tensorflow Fairness Indicators
Ai Explainability 360
--- Page 37 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Al Methods Explanation Report: As explained under Transparency and Explainability section, it should
be explained why the system behaves the way it does and how it takes decisions. Although some training
methods have superior performance, they work as black-box, and it is a challenge to interpret the results.
Small deviations in the data could lead to dramatic deviations and changes in the outcome. The report
should explain the behavior of the system as well as ensure the deployment of reliable technology. The
report should help to better understand the Al systems underlying mechanism as well as the interpreta-
tion of the outcomes.
Al System stakeholders should consider the trade-off between performance, materialization, and
explanation methods. In some cases, explanation methods increase complexity or require sacrificing
performance. A cost-benefit analysis should be conducted and the level of explainability should be
justified based on this analysis.
Algorithm Auditing: Unexpected algorithmic behaviors can be detected with algorithm audits. In gen-
eral, algorithm audits are done on an ad-hoc basis, and it is important to standardize algorithm auditing
process with supporting Al algorithms. The process should be systematic and continuous. Regulating
and auditing Al systems for ethical compliance is more complicated than regulating and auditing human
decision-making or processes. Al systems should be designed with due consideration of Al Ethics prin-
ciples and controls. Auditing mechanisms should follow the same principles and controls in alignment
with these principles.
Safety Self-Assessment: Safety considerations of accuracy, reliability, security, and robustness should
be considered at every step of the Al System Lifecycle. Al system safety self-assessments should be
continuously logged and documented in a way that allows review and re-assessment. The performance
of Al system safety self-assessments should be conducted by relevant stakeholders at each stage of
the workflow. They should evaluate how the design and implementation practices line up with the safety
objectives of accuracy, reliability, security, and robustness.
--- Page 38 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Data Protection Methods: These methods help to protect data by applying data transformation meth-
ods, especially for the data that is classified as sensitive. The following data protection methods are given
as examples and they should be after data classification.
Data De-Identification: is the process of eliminating Personally Identifiable Data (PII) from any document
or other media, including an individuals Protected Health Information (PHI).
Data Anonymization: is a kind of data sanitization process that intends to protect the privacy of individuals.
It is the process of removing Pll from data sets to maintain the anonymity of individuals whom the data de-
scribes. It is often the preferred method for making structured medical datasets secure for sharing.
Data Masking: is a technique that removes or hides information, replacing it with realistic replacement
data or fake information. The objective is to create a version that cant be decoded or reverse engineered.
There are a number of ways to change the data, including encryption, character shuffling, and word or
character replacement.
Data Pseudonymization: is a way of masking data that ensures it is not possible to attribute personal data
to a specific person, without using additional information subject to security measures. It is an integral part
of the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which has several recitals specifying how and when
data should be pseudonymized.
Data Encryption: is a method of data masking, used to protect it from cybercriminals, others with malicious
intent, or accidental exposure. The data might be the contents of a database, an email note, an instant
message, or a file retained on a computer.
Data Tokenization: is a process of substituting personal data with a random token. Often, a link is maintained
between the original information and the token (such as for payment processing on sites). Tokens can be
completely random numbers or generated by one-way functions (such as salted hashes).
--- Page 39 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Data Loss Prevention (DLP): Data Loss Prevention (DLP) is used to detect and prevent data breaches.
This involves monitoring network activity, identifying and blocking suspicious behavior, and implementing
encryption and access controls.
Data Governance: Data Governance encompasses all aspects of data management throughout its en-
tire life cycle, including security, usability, availability, and privacy. This involves defining data handling
policies and processes and assigning data management authority and responsibilities.
Data Minimization: Data minimization refers to the practice of collecting just the personal information
required to satisfy a specified objective. This helps to mitigate the risks connected with data breaches
and the abuse of personal information
--- Page 40 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Annexure B: Al Ethics Tools Mapping to Al System Lifecycle
Tool Plan  Design eis Build  Validate Deploy  Monitor
Fairness Position Statement
Ethical Impact Assessment
Privacy and Security Standards    
Architecture for Trustworthy Al
Algorithm Assessment  
Fairness Assessment
Al Methods Explanation Report  
Algorithm Auditing
Safety Self-Assessment   
Data Protection Methods 
--- Page 41 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Annexure C: Al Ethics Checklist
Al System Lifecycle Phase 1: Plan  Design
Binding for
Principles
Third-party 
Accountability
Did you design the appropriate level of human oversight for the Al system and use case an
Responsibility
Does your Al system design prevent overconfdence in or overreliance on the Al system Accountability
with necessary human intervention mechanisms Responsibility
Did you de ne human oversight processes with the appropriate KPls and assign Accountability
responsibility to the relevant parties Responsibility
Did you design an operation and governance strategy to abort or intervene in the system Accountability
when the system doesnt work in an intended way Responsibility
Did you consider the liability and Data Subject protection requirements and take them Accountability
into account Responsibility
Did you define thresholds of the KPIs and did you put governance procedures or Accountability
autonomous actions in place to trigger alternativefallback plans Responsibility
PD.7 Did you provide training and education to help develop accountability practices No Accountability
1 Responsibility
Did you ensure that the Al Ethics Governance structure is compliant with the proposed Accountability
governance mechanism in the National Al Ethics Policy Responsibility
Did you ensure that the Al Ethics Governance structure includes internal or external audit Accountability
mechanisms Responsibility
Did you establish a strategy or a set of procedures to avoid creating or reinforcing unfair
bias in the Al system, covering both input data as well as for the algorithm design Fairness
--- Page 42 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Binding for
Question 
Third-party
Principles
Did you identify sensitive personal data attributes relating to persons or groups that are
systematically or historically disadvantaged If so, the permissible limit that makes the No Fairness
assessment fair or unfair must be determined.
Did you de ne fairness assessment KPIs Fairness
Did you consider a mechanism to include the participation of different stakeholders in
the Al systems development and use Fairness
Did you conduct an impact analysis on how the Al system affects fundamental human :
rights and cultural values Did you list any potential negative effects on fundamental Humanity
human rights and cultural values and the solutions or recovery mechanisms
Did you put measures in place to ensure that the Al system does not lead to people Humanity
being deceived or unjustifiably impaired in their freedom of choice
Did you align your Al system with relevant standards or policies (for example, ISO, IEEE, Privacy
Data Privacy Law) or widely adopted protocols for daily data management and
governance
Security
Did you follow established protocols, processes, and procedures to manage and ensure Pri
proper data governance Did you ensure that National Data Management and Personal rivacy
Data Protection Standards are followed Security
Did you ensure that data access control meets security, privacy, and compliance Privacy
requirements Did you design a log mechanism for audit and debug purposes Security
Did you design a risk management strategy for your Al system Did you include risk Reliability
tiers, KPls, risk assessment, and mitigation procedures Safety
--- Page 43 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Binding for
Question 
Third-party
Principles
Did you assess whether there is a likelihood that the Al system may cause damage or Reliability
harm to users or third parties Did you assess the potential damage, impacted audience, Yes
and severity Safety
Did you assess whether there is a likelihood that the Al system may unintentionally give Reliability
wrong results or inaccurate predictions, fail or feed societal biases Safety
Social
Environmental
Benefits
Did you consider the potential impact or safety risk to the environment, living creatures,
or society in addition to the Data Subjects
Did you assess whether the systems business model is aligned with the organizations Transparency
vision and mission as well as the code of conduct Explainability
Did you design an interpretable Al system where the data, algorithms, outcomes, and Transparency
decisions are transparent and explainable to the related parties Explainability
Did you design User Experience with human psychology in mind to avoid the risk of Transparency
confusion, confirmation bias, or cognitive fatigue Explainability
Was there any trade off assumption Fairness
Privacy
Have you established a measurement or assessment mechanism for privacy impact 5 it
ecurity
Has the data management approach been reviewed based on human-centric values and Humanity
according to data regulations within the KSA
--- Page 44 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Al System Lifecycle Phase 2: Prepare Input Data
Binding for
Principle
Third-party ples
Is there an established mechanism that fags issues related to data privacy or protection Privacy
in the process of data collection and processing Security
Privacy
Has the data been reviewed in terms of scope and categorization 4
Security
Has the data been reviewed to check if personal data is evident within the dataset Is 5
there an established mechanism that allows the Al model to train without or with minimal Privacy
use of personal or sensitive data Security
Is there an established mechanism that controls the usage of personal data (such as Privacy
valid consent and the possibility to revoke, when applicable) Security
Are there processes to ensure that Al systems are secure and keep information safe, Privacy
confidential, and private, as well as the integrity of the processed information even under Security
hostile or adversarial conditions
Privacy
Has the quality and source of the acquired data been assessed through set processes 5 it
ecurity
Has there been an assessment on whether an analysis can be performed post training Transparency
and testing the data Explainability
Has diversity and inclusion of the dataset at hand been considered or reviewed Fairness
Is there an established mechanism that measures whether the integrity, quality, and Accountability
accuracy of data collection and its sources have been evaluated and data is up to date Responsibility
Has an analysis process been developed for the proxies of the sensitive features Fairness
Has the team evaluated the classification, processing, and access to data to ensure that
it has been properly acquired Humanity
--- Page 45 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Binding for
Third-party
Principles
Have the data and Al models been validated to include respect for human rights, values, Humanity
and cultural preferences in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Did you classify the data using SDAIA recommendations If you use other standards, Social
please mention them. Environmental
Benefits
Are there appropriate procedures to measure the quality, accuracy, relevance, and Reliability
credibility of a data sample when dealing with data sets for an Al model Safety
Al System Lifecycle Phase 3: Build  Validate
Binding for
Principles
Third-party P
Has the behavior of the system been tested against unexpected situations and environments Is there
a defined fallback plan if the Al model encounters adversarial attacks or other unexpected situations
Have the fallback plans been tested and confirmed
Reliability
Safety
Are there defined processes that outline procedures to describe actions to be taken when an Al system Reliability
fails in different contexts Have the processes been tested Safety
Are there defined processes that outline procedures to describe when an Al system fails in different Reliability
contexts Have the processes been tested Safety
Is there an established mechanism of communication to assure the end-users of the systems Reliability
reliability Safety
Are there clear and understandable definitions explaining why the outcomes of the Al system took a Transparency
certain decision Explainability
Transparency
Explainability
Has the model been built in a simple and interpretable manner
--- Page 46 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Binding for
Third-party
Principles
Are there clear and understandable definitions explaining why the outcomes of the Al system took a Transparency
certain decision Explainability
Has the model been built in a simple and interpretable manner Transparency
Explainability
Has an examination of the Al models interpretability been successfully completed a er the models Transparency
training Explainability
Has there been a research exercise done relating to the use of available technical tools to be able to
improve the understanding of the data, model, and its performance Fairness
Are there established processes and quantitative analysis to test and monitor for potential biases and
the overall fairness of the system during the development of the system Are there mechanisms in
place to protect any individuals or groups who might be disproportionately affected by negative
implications
Fairness
Are there any established mechanisms that assess whether the Al system encourages humans to Social
develop attachment and empathy towards the system Are there mechanisms that ensure that the Al Environmental
systems social interaction is simulated and that it has no capacity for feelings Benefits
Have the stakeholders approved the successful tests and validated rounds of user acceptance testing Accountability
prior to the production of Al models Responsibility
Did you use any sensitive data attributes in the model If so, justify the use of sensitive personal data
attributes or their proxies Fairness
Are there Al approaches and algorithms that allow and facilitate decision-making alignment with
human rights and KSAs cultural values Humanity
--- Page 47 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Al System Lifecycle Phase 4: Deploy  Monitor
Binding for
Third-party
Principles
In case of a chatbot or other communication systems, are the end-users aware that they are interacting Accountability
with a non-human correspondent Responsibility
Has the team assessed the Al systems vulnerabilities to potential attacks, revelation of sensitive data, Privacy
or breaking the confidentiality Security
Are there mechanisms to measure if the system is producing an unacceptable amount of inaccurate Accountability
predictions Responsibility
Is there a set strategy in place to monitor and measure if the Al system is meeting the goals, purposes, Reliability
and intended applications Safety
Are the persons who are accessing the data quali ed with the necessary competences to understand Privacy
the details of data protection requirements Security
Are there mechanisms in place to assess the level of in uence the Al system may have on end-users Transparency
decision-making Explainability
Is there a process set in place, which is clear and explainable, to inform end-users of the reasons,
criteria, and benefits behind the outcomes and results of the Al system Are there clear steps of
communication on how and to whom issues can be raised
Transparency
Explainability
Is there a process set in place to collect and consider the end-users feedback and adopt it into to the Transparency
system Explainability
Are there established processes and quantitative analysis to monitor biases and the overall
fairness of the system during the deployment of the system Fairness
In the case of variability, did you establish a measurement or assessment mechanism of
the potential impact of such variability on fundamental rights Fairness
--- Page 48 ---
Al Ethics Principles
Binding for
Third-party
Are there established mechanisms to ensure fairness in your Al systems px  Fairness
Is the information about the Al system accessible to end-users of assistive technologies No Fairness
Social
Environmental
Benefits
Question
Principles
Are there established mechanisms to measure the social and environmental impact of the
Al systems deployment and use
Are there established mechanisms to ensure the application of fundamental human rights Accountability
Responsibility
Are there established processes for third parties or workers to report potential Accountability
vulnerabilities, risks, or biases in the Al system Responsibility
Are there established mechanisms to demonstrate your compliance with the principles set Accountability
out in this document Responsibility
Are there established mechanisms that allow for redress in case of the occurrence of any Accountability
harm or adverse impact Responsibility
Are there established mechanisms that provide information to end-usersthird parties Accountability
about opportunities for redress Responsibility
Are there continuous monitoring techniques to ensure that the Al system maintains privacy Privacy
and security Security
Are there periodic assessments of the deployed artificial intelligence systems to ensure the
implementation of fundamental human rights and cultural values of the Kingdom Humanity
--- Page 50 ---
May 2025 ic. SDAIA
Document Type  Regulatory Documents الهيئة السعودية للبيانات
Document Classification  General 
Saudi Data  Al Authority
Document Number  SDAIA-P114E
Version Number  1
SDAIA.GOV.SA QQSDAIASA BSDAIA.SAUDI  SDAIA-KSA